CHAPTER 4
RESIDENTIAL ZONES
ARTICLE A. PERMITTED USES IN RESIDENTIAL ZONES
SECTION:
15-4A-1: Permitted Uses
15-4A-1: PERMITTED USES:
Table No. 1 below contains the uses permitted in the R-1, R-2 and R-3 zones, including uses permitted by right, accessory uses, and uses subject to a conditional use permit.

 
Notes:
   1.   P = Permitted use, A = Accessory use, AUP = Use subject to an administrative use permit (Per ESMC Chapters 15-22 and 15-23), CUP = Use subject to a conditional use permit (per ESMC Chapters 24 and 28), N = prohibited
   2.   A short-term rental unit is not a permitted use in the absence of a valid short-term rental permit per ESMC Chapter 4-16
   3.   Subject to the provisions of ESMC Chapter 15-13C (Micro-units)
(Ord. 1648, 6-21-2023; amd. Ord. 1653, 12-5-2023; Ord. 1654, 12-19-2023)
ARTICLE B. SINGLE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL (R-1) ZONE
SECTION:
15-4B-1: Purpose
15-4B-2: Permitted Uses
15-4B-3: Site Development Standards For Lots Wider Than Twenty-Five Feet
15-4B-3-1: Site Development Standards For Lots Twenty-Five Feet Wide Or Less
15-4B-4: Landscaping (All Lots)
15-4B-5: Off Street Parking And Loading Spaces (All Lots)
15-4B-6: Signs (All Lots)
15-4B-7: Vehicular Access (All Lots)
15-4B-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this zone is to provide consistency with and implement policies related to those locations which are designated Single-Family on the General Plan land use map and in the General Plan text. This zone is to provide for and promote the development of single-family homes within a safe and healthy environment for existing and future residents. (Ord. 1648, 6-21-2023)
15-4B-2: PERMITTED USES:
Permitted uses, permitted accessory uses, and uses subject to conditional use permit for all residential zones are listed in Article 15-4A of this Title. (Ord. 1648, 6-21-2023)
15-4B-3: SITE DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS FOR LOTS WIDER THAN TWENTY-FIVE FEET:
All uses on lots that are wider than 25 feet within the R-1 Zone must comply with the development standards contained in this section.
   A.   General Provisions:
      1.   As provided by chapter 2 of this title.
      2.   New dwelling units must be internally integrated and connected.
      3.   An addition to, or extension of, a dwelling unit, except a garage or an accessory dwelling unit, must share a common wall and be internally integrated and connected to the existing dwelling unit.
      4.   Mobile and manufactured homes are subject to the following requirements:
         a.   The mobile or manufactured homes has been certified pursuant to the National Manufactured Housing Construction and Safety Standards Act of 1974, and has not been altered in violation of applicable codes; and
         b.   The mobile or manufactured home must be installed on a permanent foundation in compliance with all applicable building regulations and division 13, part 2 (commencing with section 18000) of the California Health and Safety Code.
   B.   Height:
      1.   The height of all buildings or structures with a pitched roof must not exceed 32 feet and two stories. Buildings or structures with a flat roof must not exceed 26 feet and two stories.
      2.   A maximum grade differential of six feet is permitted on sloping lots. The height which exceeds the maximum grade differential is included in measuring the maximum building height. On sloped lots, a segmented grade plane may be applied to different portions of a building.
      3.   See section 15-2-3 of this title for exceptions to building height.
   C.   Lot Area: A minimum of 5,000 square feet.
   D.   Setbacks:
      1.   Front yard: Minimum setback of 22 feet. Front yard setbacks for two car and three car garages located in the front half of a lot must comply with the standards contained in subsection G of this section.
         a.   Permitted front yard setback encroachments:
         (1)   Porches or verandas in a front yard setback not fully enclosed on three sides (railings and/or columns permitted) may encroach into the front setback a maximum of six feet;
         (2)   The first floor front yard setback facing exterior wall of a dwelling may encroach up to two feet for a width not exceeding 30 feet when a first floor porch or veranda, not fully enclosed on three sides, is also projecting into the front yard setback. The total amount of encroachment may not exceed six feet in depth combined for both the dwelling structure and a porch or veranda, for a minimum 50 percent of the building width;
         (3)   Raised decks, where the walking surface is not greater than 24 inches above adjacent grade, in conjunction with a lattice deck cover not greater than 10 feet above adjacent grade may encroach into the front yard setback a maximum of six feet in depth and 50 percent of the building width;
         (4)   Lattice patio covers, pergolas, arbors, or trellises not greater than 10 feet in height (as measured from the lowest adjacent grade to the highest point of the cover) may encroach into the front yard setback a maximum of six feet in depth and 50 percent of the building width;
         (5)   Architectural elements such as towers or turrets not greater than eight feet in diameter may encroach into the front setback a maximum of four feet;
      2.   Side yard: Primary structures must maintain a minimum side yard setback of 10 percent of the width of the lot, but can never be less than three feet and need not be more than six feet.
      3.   Setbacks for detached accessory structures:
         a.   Detached accessory structures, including garages, must maintain a minimum side yard setback of 10 percent of the width of the lot, but may not be less than three feet and need not be more than six feet on the first floor.
         b.   The second floor of a detached accessory structure, including garages, must maintain a minimum side yard setback of 10 percent of the width of the lot plus an additional setback of two feet, but must not be less than five feet and need not be more than eight feet.
         c.   Detached accessory structures, including garages, located in the rear third of the lot, must maintain a minimum side yard setback of two feet on the first floor and five feet on the second floor.
         d.   Detached accessory structures must maintain a minimum rear yard setback of three feet on the first floor and five feet on the second floor.
         e.   Rooftop decks with required railings are permitted on single-story accessory structures and on top of the single-story portions of two-story accessory structures. Rooftop decks are not permitted on top of two-story accessory structures. Rooftop decks must maintain a minimum side yard setback of 10 percent of the width of the lot, plus an additional setback of two feet but can never be less than five feet, as measured from the property line to the required railing of the rooftop deck.
      4.   Side yard, Reversed Corner: Reversed corner lots must have the following side yard with a triangular area described as follows: One angle must be formed by the rear and street side property lines, and the sides of this angle must be 15 feet in length, measured along the rear and street side property lines. The third side of this triangle must be a straight line connecting the two other lines at their endpoints. This triangular side yard setback area is in addition to the other side yard setback requirements described in subsections D2 and D3 of this section.
      5.   Rear yard: Primary structures must maintain a minimum setback of five feet.
      6.   Exceptions: Notwithstanding the provisions of this subsection D, the west side yard of 618 W. Oak Avenue, more particularly described as the north 142.5 feet of the south 285 feet of the east 50.265 feet of Lot 14, Block 9, Tract No. 1685, commencing 63 feet south of the front lot line and continuing south a distance of 30 feet, must be three inches in width so long as that certain structure located along that 30-foot distance which existed on January 11, 1973, remains in existence. Upon the removal or destruction of said building, this property is no longer exempt from this subsection D.
      Notwithstanding the provisions of this subsection D, the south side yard of 724 Penn Street, more particularly described as the south 55 feet of the north 110 feet of Lot 8, Block 92, El Segundo Sheet No. 4, commencing 84 feet east of the front lot line and continuing east a distance of 20 feet, must be three feet in width so long as that certain structure located along that 20 foot distance which existed on January 11, 1973, remains in existence. Upon the removal or destruction of said building, this property is no longer exempt from this subsection D.
   E.   Lot Width: A minimum of 50 feet.
   F.   Minimum Unit Size and Floor Area Ratio: The minimum dwelling unit size shall be 250 square feet and the floor area ratio shall be as follows:
      1.   The maximum total building area on the lot shall not exceed an overall floor area ratio (FAR) of 0.60. There is no minimum building size.
      2.   The maximum FAR for the second floor of the primary structure shall not exceed 0.25.
      3.   In calculating the overall FAR, floor area is measured to the interior of a building’s perimeter walls and shall include all floors of the primary dwelling (i.e., main structure), attached and detached accessory dwelling units, habitable attic space, accessory buildings, balconies, decks, verandas, and porches.
      4.   Areas where the vertical measurement between the floor and ceiling directly above is 14 feet or more shall be counted on both the first and second stories for FAR calculations (areas such as rotundas, spaces with vaulted ceilings, and other similar areas with volume).
      5.   Stairs and elevators are counted once and are applied to the first floor.
      6.   For purposes of calculating floor area, the following are not included:
         a.   Basements as defined in section 15-1-6 of this title;
         b.   Up to 500 square feet of interior floor area of an attached or detached garage;
         c.   Detached accessory structures measuring not more than 120 square feet;
         d.   First floor decks, verandas and porches under 30 inches in height (as measured from adjacent grade to the walking surface).
         e.   Up to 500 square feet cumulative of first floor decks, verandas and porches, covered or uncovered, attached or detached, and at least 30 inches in height (as measured from adjacent grade to the walking surface), provided that the deck, veranda or porch is at least 50 percent open on the sides.
         f.   Second floor balconies and decks that are not covered.
         g.   Up to 12 square feet of second floor decks and balconies that are covered by roof, lattice or trellis.
         h.   The area of decks, balconies, verandas or porches covered by eave projections up to 18 inches.
   G.   Placement of buildings and structures:
      1.   A minimum distance of three feet must be maintained between buildings.
      2.   A detached single-story accessory structure in the rear third of the lot may be located as described in the requirements for setbacks in subsection D of this section, unless one of the following conditions exists:
         a.   Where the lot abuts an alley and the vehicular entrance to the detached accessory structure is from the alley, such detached accessory structure must be set back a distance measured from the opposite side of the alley that will provide a turning radius as follows:
90 degrees - 25 feet
75 degrees - 21 feet
60 degrees - 18 feet
45 degrees - 15 feet
         b.   On the rear third of a reversed corner lot a single-story detached accessory structure may be built to the interior lot side line, but no building may be erected closer than five feet to the property line of any abutting lot to the rear. However, if an alley intervenes and the vehicular entrance to the detached accessory building is directly from the street side, a detached accessory building may be built to the rear lot line.
      3.   A garage that is attached to a dwelling that is located in the front half of the lot facing the front property line must be set back a minimum of 24 feet from the front property line unless the building has a porch, veranda, or deck at least eight feet in width by four feet in depth, then a minimum front setback of 22 feet is permitted.
      4.   An attached three-car garage located in the front half of the lot that faces the front property line where one of the stalls is not tandem, must have at least two individual car door openings. The following garage designs are encouraged:
         a.   Three-car garages constructed as attached or detached structures at the rear of a lot.
         b.   Tandem for parking provided in excess of a two-car garage.
         c.   Attached three-car garages located on the front of a dwelling face toward the side property lines.
      5.   Accessory outdoor showers attached to a building wall are permitted, but must not encroach in a required setback and must not be roofed. They may be enclosed with walls on three sides and a shower door on one side.
   H.    Entry orientation:
      1.   For street-facing lots, at least one entry door to a residential unit must face (be parallel to) and be directly visible from the adjoining street and sidewalk. Alternatively, if the residential unit has an entry door that takes access from a porch or veranda measuring a minimum of four feet by four feet that faces and is directly visible from the adjoining street and sidewalk, the entry door may face the side/interior lot line (be perpendicular to the street and sidewalk).
   I.   Detached accessory buildings as defined in section 15-1-6 of this Title:
      1. All detached accessory structures may not exceed 1,200 square feet gross floor area in aggregate per parcel;
      2. Except as permitted in Chapter 15-4E related to accessory dwelling units, detached accessory buildings are limited to two (2) stories, and may include an attic, which may be used for storage purposes only, provided that access to the attic is not from permanently fixed stairs (pull down type stairs are permitted), no plumbing is permitted, and electrical fixtures are limited to the minimum required by the California Building Code and California Electrical Code;
      3. Unless permitted as an accessory dwelling unit, detached accessory buildings may not contain a kitchen or kitchen facilities, a bathtub or shower and may not be used for sleeping purposes or as an “R” occupancy, as defined by the California Building Code, except that they may contain a sink and a toilet;
      4. Unless permitted as an accessory dwelling unit, detached accessory buildings may not be rented or used as a separate dwelling unit; and
      5. Before the City issues a building permit for a detached accessory structure, except an accessory dwelling unit, the Director will require that a covenant running with the land be recorded stating that the accessory structure may not be used in violation of this section. (Ord. 1648, 6-21-2023; amd. Ord. 1672, 5-20-2025)
15-4B-3-1: SITE DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS FOR LOTS TWENTY-FIVE FEET WIDE OR LESS:
All uses on lots 25 feet wide or less within the R-1 Zone must comply with the development standards contained in this section.
   A.   General Provisions:
      1.   As provided by chapter 2 of this title.
      2.   New dwelling units must be internally integrated and connected.
      3.   An addition to, or extension of, a dwelling unit, except a garage or an accessory dwelling unit, must share a common wall and be internally integrated and connected to the existing dwelling unit.
      4.   Mobile and manufactured homes are subject to the following requirements:
         a.   The mobile or manufactured homes has been certified pursuant to the National Manufactured Housing Construction and Safety Standards Act of 1974, and has not been altered in violation of applicable codes; and
         b.   The mobile or manufactured home must be installed on a permanent foundation in compliance with all applicable building regulations and division 13, part 2 (commencing with section 18000) of the California Health and Safety Code.
   B.   Height:
      1.   The height of all buildings or structures with a pitched roof must not exceed 32 feet and two stories. Buildings or structures with a flat roof must not exceed 26 feet and two stories.
      2.   A maximum grade differential of six feet is permitted on sloping lots. The vertical height which exceeds the maximum grade differential is included in measuring the maximum building height. On sloped lots, a segmented grade plane may be applied to different portions of a building.
      3.   See section 15-2-3 of this title for exceptions to building height.
   C.   Lot area: A minimum of 5,000 square feet.
   D.   Setbacks:
      1.   Front yard: A minimum of 22 feet.
         a.   Permitted front yard setback encroachments:
         (1)   Porches or verandas in a front yard setback not fully enclosed on three sides (railings and/or columns permitted) may encroach into the front setback a maximum of six feet;
         (2)   The first floor front yard setback facing exterior wall of a dwelling may encroach up to two feet for a width not exceeding 30 feet when a first floor porch or veranda, not fully enclosed on three sides, is also projecting into the front yard setback. The total amount of encroachment may not exceed six feet in depth combined for both the dwelling structure and a porch or veranda, for a minimum 50 percent of the building width;
         (3)   Raised decks, where the walking surface is not greater than 24 inches above adjacent grade, in conjunction with a lattice deck cover not greater than 10 feet above adjacent grade may encroach into the front yard setback a maximum of six feet in depth and 50 percent of the building width;
         (4)   Lattice patio covers, pergolas, arbors, or trellises not greater than 10 feet above adjacent grade (as measured from the lowest adjacent grade to the highest point of the cover) may encroach into the front yard setback a maximum of six feet in depth and 50 percent of the building width;
         (5)   Architectural elements such as towers or turrets not greater than eight feet in diameter may encroach into the front setback a maximum of four feet;
      2.   Side yard: A minimum of three feet.
      3.   Detached accessory structures and garages: Detached accessory structures and attached garages are allowed along the property line on one interior side lot line, provided that the detached accessory structure or attached garage is in the rear one-third of the lot.
      4.   Side yard, reverse corner: Reversed corner lots must have a side yard with a triangular area described as follows: One angle must be formed by the rear and street side property lines, and the sides of this angle must be 15 feet in length, measured along the rear and street side property lines. The third side of this triangle must be a straight line connecting the two other lines at their endpoints. This triangular side yard setback area is in addition to the other side yard setback requirements described in subsection D2 of this section.
      5.   Rear yard: Primary structures must maintain a minimum setback of five feet on the first and second floors.
      6.   Detached accessory structures and garages: Detached accessory structures and garages are allowed a rear yard setback of zero feet on the first story and must maintain a rear yard setback of five feet on the second story.
   E.   Lot Width: A minimum of 50 feet.
   F.   Minimum Unit Size: The minimum dwelling unit size shall be 250 square feet.
   G.   Placement of buildings and structures:
      1.   A minimum distance of three feet must be maintained between buildings;
      2.   A detached accessory structure in the rear third of the lot may be located on the rear and one interior side lot line, unless one of the following conditions exists:
         a.   Where the lot rears upon an alley and the vehicular entrance to the detached accessory structure is from the alley, such detached accessory structure must be set back a distance measured from the opposite side of the alley that will provide a turning radius as follows:
90 degrees - 25 feet
75 degrees - 21 feet
60 degrees - 18 feet
45 degrees - 15 feet
         b.   On the rear third of a reversed corner lot a detached accessory structure may be built to the interior lot side line, but no building must be erected closer than five feet to the property line of any abutting lot to the rear. However, if an alley intervenes and the vehicular entrance to the detached accessory building is directly from the street side, a detached accessory building may be built to the rear lot line.
   H.   Lot Coverage: All buildings, including detached accessory buildings, shall not cover more than 47 percent of the lot area.
   I.   Entry Orientation:
      1.   For street-facing lots, at least one entry door to a residential unit must face (be parallel to) and be directly visible from the adjoining street and sidewalk. Alternatively, if the residential unit has an entry door that takes access from a porch or veranda measuring a minimum of four feet by four feet that faces and is directly visible from the adjoining street and sidewalk, the entry door may face the side/interior lot line (be perpendicular to the street and sidewalk).
   J.   Building Wall Modulation: In addition to any doors or windows, building walls must incorporate at least two architectural building features as defined in section 15-1-6 of this title on all elevations.
   K.   Detached accessory buildings, not including detached accessory dwelling units as defined in section 15-1-6 of this Title:
      1.   All detached accessory structures may not exceed 1,200 square feet gross floor area in aggregate per parcel except as permitted in Chapter 15-4D;
      2.   Except as permitted in Chapter 15-4E related to accessory dwelling units, detached accessory buildings are limited to one floor, but may include an attic, which may be used for storage purposes only, provided access to the attic is not from permanently fixed stairs (pull down type stairs are permitted), no plumbing is permitted, and electrical fixtures are limited to the minimum required by the California Building Code and California Electrical Code;
      3.   Unless permitted as an accessory dwelling unit, detached accessory buildings may not contain a kitchen or kitchen facilities, a bathtub or shower and may not be used for sleeping purposes or as an R occupancy, as defined by the California Building Code, except that they may contain a sink and a toilet;
      4.   Unless permitted as an accessory dwelling unit, detached accessory buildings may not be rented or used as a separate dwelling unit; and
      5.   Before the City issues a building permit for a detached accessory structure, except an accessory dwelling unit, the Director must require that a covenant running with the land be recorded stating that the accessory structure may not be used in violation of this section. (Ord. 1648, 6-21-2023; amd. Ord. 1672, 5-20-2025)
15-4B-4: LANDSCAPING (ALL LOTS):
Landscaping and irrigation must be provided within the front and street side setback areas. Those setback areas fronting upon a public street must incorporate a combination of softscape and hardscape in the landscape except for those portions devoted to vehicular parking. They may contain artificial turf or synthetic grass provided that it: 1) is not harmful to the environment (such as containing lead based or other hazardous materials); 2) includes a pervious surface to address percolation, drainage, runoff, and stormwater detention requirements; and 3) is incorporated into a comprehensive landscaping design and site plan.
   A.   A minimum of 25 percent of the front yard setback area must be maintained with permanent landscaping that contains a combination of lawn, trees, vines, bushes and ground covers, and does not include hardscape materials for lots less than 50 feet in width.
   B.   A minimum of 35 percent of the front yard setback area must be maintained with permanent landscaping that contains a combination of lawn, trees, vines, bushes and ground covers, and does not include hardscape materials for lots that are 50 feet or greater in width.
   C.   A minimum of one 24-inch box tree with irrigation must be planted and maintained in the front yard in conjunction with the construction of a new primary dwelling unit. (Ord. 1648, 6-21-2023; amd. Ord. 1672, 5-20-2025)
15-4B-5: OFF STREET PARKING AND LOADING SPACES (ALL LOTS):
Off street parking must be provided as required by chapter 15 of this title. (Ord. 1648, 6-21-2023; amd. Ord. 1672, 5-20-2025)
15-4B-6: SIGNS (ALL LOTS):
Signs in the R-1 zone must comply with the requirements of chapter 18 of this title. (Ord. 1648, 6-21-2023; amd. Ord. 1672, 5-20-2025)
15-4B-7: VEHICULAR ACCESS (ALL LOTS):
   A.   Where an R-1 lot abuts an alley, vehicular access to the lot must be from the alley.
   B.   Where a lot abuts an alley and the vehicular entrance to the structure is from the alley, such vehicular entrance must be set back a distance measured from the opposite side of the alley that will provide a turning radius as follows:
 
 
   C.   Curb cuts and driveways must be installed in conformance with ESMC Section 15-15-5 (Parking Area Development Standards). (Ord. 1648, 6-21-2023; amd. Ord. 1672, 5-20-2025)
 
ARTICLE C. TWO-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL (R-2) ZONE
SECTION:
15-4C-1: Purpose
15-4C-2: Permitted Uses
15-4C-3: Site Development Standards
15-4C-4: Landscaping
15-4C-5: Off Street Parking And Loading Spaces
15-4C-6: Signs
15-4C-7: Vehicular Access
15-4C-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this zone is to provide consistency with and implement policies related to those locations which are designated Two-Family on the General Plan land use map and in the text. This zone is to provide for and promote the development of single-family and two-family homes within a safe and healthy environment for existing and future residents. (Ord. 1648, 6-21-2023)
15-4C-2: PERMITTED USES:
Permitted uses, permitted accessory uses, and uses subject to conditional use permit for all residential zones are listed in Article 15-4A of this Title. (Ord. 1648, 6-21-2023)
15-4C-3: SITE DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS:
All uses in the R-2 Zone shall comply with the development standards contained in this section.
   A.   General Provisions:
      1.   As provided by chapter 2 of this title.
      2.   Any use permitted in the R-1 Zone, when developed in the R-2 Zone, shall be constructed in accordance with R-2 site developments standards and parking requirements.
      3.   New dwelling units must be internally integrated and connected.
      4.   An addition to, or extension of a dwelling unit, except a garage or an accessory dwelling unit, must share a common wall and be internally integrated and connected to the existing dwelling unit.
      5.   Mobile and manufactured homes are subject to the following requirements:
         a.   The mobile or manufactured home has been certified pursuant to the National Manufactured Housing Construction and Safety Standards Act of 1974, and has not been altered in violation of applicable codes; and
         b.   The mobile or manufactured home must be installed on a permanent foundation in compliance with all applicable building regulations and division 13, part 2 (commencing with section 18000) of the California Health and Safety Code.
   B.   Height:
      1.   The height of all buildings or structures with a pitched roof shall not exceed 32 feet and two stories. Buildings or structures with a flat roof must not exceed 26 feet and two stories.
      2.   A maximum grade differential of six feet is permitted on sloping lots. The vertical height which exceeds the maximum grade differential limit is included in measuring the maximum building height. On sloped lots, a segmented grade plane may be applied to different portions of a building.
      3.   See section 15-2-3 of this title for exceptions to building height.
   C.   Lot Area: A minimum of 7,000 square feet. Lots less than 4,000 square feet in area shall be occupied by only one dwelling unit, provided all other requirements of this title are met.
   D.   Setbacks:
      1.   Front yard: A minimum of 20 feet.
         a.   Permitted front yard setback encroachments:
         (1)   Porches or verandas in a front yard setback not fully enclosed on three sides (railings and/or columns permitted) may encroach into the front setback a maximum of six feet;
         (2)   The first floor front yard setback facing exterior wall of a dwelling may encroach up to two feet for a width not exceeding 30 feet when a first floor porch or veranda, not fully enclosed on three sides, is also projecting into the front yard setback. The total amount of encroachment may not exceed six feet in depth combined for both the dwelling structure and a porch or veranda, for a minimum 50 percent of the building width;
         (3)   Raised decks, where the walking surface is not greater than 24 inches above adjacent grade, in conjunction with a lattice deck cover not greater than 10 feet above adjacent grade may encroach into the front yard setback a maximum of six feet in depth and 50 percent of the building width;
         (4)   Lattice patio covers, pergolas, arbors, or trellises not greater than 10 feet above adjacent grade (as measured from the lowest adjacent grade to the highest point of the cover) may encroach into the front yard setback a maximum of six feet in depth and 50 percent of the building width;
         (5)   Architectural elements such as towers or turrets not greater than eight feet in diameter may encroach into the front setback a maximum of four feet.
      2.   Side Yard: Structures shall maintain a minimum setback on each side of the lot of 10 percent of the width of the lot, but shall never be less than three feet and need not be more than five feet. Any detached accessory structures, and attached garages on 25-foot wide lots only, located on the rear one-third of the lot are allowed zero setback on one interior side lot line.
      3.   Side Yard, Reversed Corner: Reversed corner lots shall have the following side yard with a triangular area described as follows: one angle shall be formed by the rear and street side property lines, and the sides of this angle shall be 15 feet in length, measured along the rear and street side property lines. The third side of this triangle shall be a straight line connecting the two other lines at their endpoints. This triangular side yard setback area shall be in addition to the other side yard setback requirements described in subsection D2 of this section.
      4.   Rear Yard: A minimum of five feet. Detached accessory structures are allowed zero setback on the rear property line. A dwelling unit above a garage where the vehicular entrance is from an alley shall maintain a minimum one-foot setback.
   E.   Lot width: A minimum of 50 feet.
   F.   Minimum Unit Size: The minimum dwelling unit size shall be 250 square feet.
   G.   Placement of buildings and structures:
      1.   A minimum distance of three feet must be maintained between buildings.
      2.   A detached accessory structure in the rear one-third of the lot may be located on the rear and one interior side lot line, unless one of the following conditions exists:
         a.   Where the lot rears upon an alley and the vehicular entrance to the detached accessory structure is from the alley, such detached accessory structure shall be set back a distance measured from the opposite side of the alley that will provide a turning radius as follows:
            90 degrees - 25 feet
            75 degrees - 21 feet
            60 degrees - 18 feet
            45 degrees - 15 feet
         b.   On the rear third of a reversed corner lot, a detached accessory structure may be built to the interior lot side line, but no building shall be erected closer than five feet to the property line of any abutting lot to the rear. However, if an alley intervenes and the vehicular entrance to the detached accessory building is directly from the street side, a detached accessory building may be built to the rear lot line.
   H.   Building wall modulation:
      1.   Lots greater than 4,000 square feet in area: No plane of a building wall facing a property line shall exceed 24 feet in height or length without at least a two-foot offset for a minimum length of six feet in the wall plane. When expanding or adding onto the height or length of an existing building wall, only the expansion or addition shall not exceed 24 feet without wall modulation. Below is an example of wall modulation for walls up to 30 feet.

 

      2.   Lots 4,000 square feet or less in area: Architectural building features must be included to modulate the building walls subject to the approval of the Director.
   I.   Lot coverage: All buildings, including detached accessory buildings, shall not cover more than 50 percent of the area of the lot.
   J.   Detached Accessory Buildings:
      1.   All detached accessory structures shall not exceed 1,200 square feet in aggregate per parcel.
      2.   Except as permitted in Chapter 15-4E related to accessory dwelling units, detached accessory buildings shall be limited to one floor, but may include an attic, which may be used for storage purposes only, provided access to the attic is not from permanently fixed stairs (pull down type stairs are permitted), no plumbing is permitted, and electrical fixtures are limited to the minimum required by the California Building Code and California Electrical Code.
      3.   Unless permitted as an accessory dwelling unit, detached accessory buildings shall not contain a kitchen or kitchen facilities, a bathtub or shower and shall not be used for sleeping purposes or as an "R" occupancy, as defined by the California Building Code, except that they may contain a sink and a toilet.
      4.   Unless permitted as an accessory dwelling unit, detached accessory buildings shall not be rented or used as a separate dwelling unit.
      5.   Prior to issuance of a building permit for a detached accessory structure, except an accessory dwelling unit, the Director shall require the recording of a covenant to run with the land, which states that the accessory structure shall not be used in violation of this section. (Ord. 1648, 6-21-2023)
15-4C-4: LANDSCAPING:
Landscaping and irrigation must be provided within the front yard and street side setback areas. Those setback areas fronting upon a public street must incorporate a combination of softscape and hardscape in the landscape, except for those portions devoted to vehicular parking. They may contain artificial turf or synthetic grass provided that it: 1) is not harmful to the environment (such as containing lead based or other hazardous materials); 2) includes a pervious surface to address percolation, drainage, runoff, and stormwater detention requirements; and 3) is incorporated into a comprehensive landscaping design and site plan. (Ord. 1648, 6-21-2023)
15-4C-5: OFF STREET PARKING AND LOADING SPACES:
As required by chapter 15 of this title. (Ord. 1648, 6-21-2023)
15-4C-6: SIGNS:
As required by chapter 18 of this title. (Ord. 1648, 6-21-2023)
15-4C-7: VEHICULAR ACCESS:
Where an R-2 lot abuts an alley, vehicular access to the lot must be from the alley. Curb cuts and driveways must be installed in conformance with ESMC subsection 15-15-5O. (Ord. 1648, 6-21-2023)
ARTICLE D. MULTI-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL (R-3) ZONE
SECTION:
15-4D-1: Purpose
15-4D-2: Permitted Uses
15-4D-3: Site Development Standards
15-4D-4: Landscaping
15-4D-5: Off Street Parking And Loading Spaces
15-4D-6: Signs
15-4D-7: Vehicular Access
15-4D-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this zone is to provide consistency with and implement policies related to those locations which are designated Multi-Family on the General Plan land use map and in the General Plan text. This zone is to provide for the development of multi-family complexes with amenities for children and adults and promote a safe and healthy environment for existing and future residents. (Ord. 1648, 6-21-2023)
15-4D-2: PERMITTED USES:
Permitted uses, permitted accessory uses, and uses subject to conditional use permit for all residential zones are listed in Article 15-4A of this Title. (Ord. 1648, 6-21-2023)
15-4D-3: SITE DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS:
   A.   General Provisions:
      1.   As provided by chapter 2 of this title.
      2.   Any use permitted in the R-1 or R-2 Zones, when developed in the R-3 Zone, shall be constructed in accordance with R-3 site developments standards and parking requirements.
      3.   New dwelling units must be internally integrated and connected.
      4.   An addition to, or extension of, a dwelling unit, except a garage or an accessory dwelling unit, must share a common wall and be internally integrated and connected to the existing dwelling unit.
      5.   Mobile and manufactured homes are subject to the following requirements:
         a.   The mobile or manufactured home has been certified pursuant to the National Manufactured Housing Construction and Safety Standards Act of 1974, and has not been altered in violation of applicable codes; and
         b.   The mobile or manufactured home must be installed on a permanent foundation in compliance with all applicable building regulations and division 13, part 2 (commencing with section 18000) of the California Health and Safety Code.
   B.   Lot Area: A minimum of 7,000 square feet.
   C.   Height:
      1.   The height of all buildings or structures with a pitched roof shall not exceed 32 feet and two stories. Buildings or structures with a flat roof must not exceed 26 feet and two stories.
      2.   A maximum grade differential of six feet is permitted on sloping lots. The height which exceeds the maximum grade differential limit is included in measuring the maximum building height. On sloped lots, a segmented grade plane may be applied to different portions of a building.
      3.   See section 15-2-3 of this title for exceptions to building height.

   D.   Setbacks:
      1.   Front yard: Structures must maintain a minimum setback of 15 feet. Entry gates for vehicular access must maintain a minimum setback of 20 feet.
         a.   Permitted front yard setback encroachments:
            (1)   Porches or verandas in a front yard setback not fully enclosed on three sides (railings and/or columns permitted) may encroach into the front setback a maximum of six feet;
            (2)   The first floor front yard setback facing exterior wall of a dwelling may encroach up to two feet for a width not exceeding 30 feet when a first floor porch or veranda, not fully enclosed on three sides, is also projecting into the front yard setback. The total amount of encroachment may not exceed six feet in depth combined for    both the dwelling structure and a porch or veranda, for a minimum 50 percent of the building width;
            (3)   Raised decks, where the walking surface is not greater than 24 inches above adjacent grade, in conjunction with a lattice deck cover not greater than 10 feet above adjacent grade may encroach into the front yard setback a maximum of six feet in depth and 50 percent of the building width;
            (4)   Lattice patio covers, pergolas, arbors, or trellises not greater than 10 feet above adjacent grade (as measured from the lowest adjacent grade to the highest point of the cover) may encroach into the front yard setback a maximum of six feet in depth and 50 percent of the building width;
            (5)   Architectural elements such as towers or turrets not greater than eight feet in diameter may encroach into the front setback a maximum of four feet.
      2.   Side yard facing a side street: 10 percent of the width of the lot, but not less than three feet and not more than five feet, except if parking garages or covered parking spaces face a street, then the setback shall be 20 feet.
      3.   Side yard facing an adjacent lot: 10 percent of the width of the lot on each side of the lot, but not less than three feet and need not be more than five feet. Detached accessory structures, located in the rear one-third of the lot, are allowed zero setback on one interior side lot line.
      4.   Side yard, reversed corner: Reversed corner lots shall have a side yard with a triangular area described as follows: one angle shall be formed by the rear and street side property lines, and the sides of this angle shall be 15 feet in length, measured along the rear and street side property lines. The third side of this triangle shall be a straight line connecting the two other lines at their endpoints. This triangular side yard setback area shall be in addition to the other side yard setback requirements described in subsections D2 and D3 of this section.
      5.   Rear Yard: A minimum of 10 feet.
      6.   Rear Yard: Detached accessory structures are allowed zero setback on the rear property line and on one interior lot side line in the rear one-third of the lot.
   E.   Lot Width: A minimum of 50 feet.
   F.   Minimum Unit Size: The minimum dwelling unit size shall be 250 square feet.
   G.   Density: The maximum permitted density shall be 30 dwelling units per acre.
   H.   Placement of buildings and structures:
      1.   A minimum distance of three feet must be maintained between buildings;
      2.   A detached accessory structure in the rear one-third of the lot may be located on the rear and one interior side lot line, unless one of the following conditions exists:
         a.   Where the lot rears upon an alley and the vehicular entrance to the detached accessory structure is from the alley, such detached accessory structure shall be set back a distance measured from the opposite side of the alley that will provide a turning radius as follows:
90 degrees - 25 feet
75 degrees - 21 feet
60 degrees - 18 feet
45 degrees - 15 feet
         b.   On the rear third of a reversed corner lot, a detached accessory structure may be built to the interior lot side line, but no building shall be erected closer than five feet to the property line of any abutting lot to the rear. However, if an alley intervenes and the vehicular entrance to the detached accessory building is directly from the street side, a detached accessory building may be built to the rear lot line.
         c.   Notwithstanding the above, a detached accessory dwelling unit must be set back at least four feet from interior side and rear property lines.
   I.   Lot Coverage: All buildings, including detached accessory buildings, shall not cover more than 53 percent of the area of the lot.
   J.   Open space and recreation requirements: The following minimum open space and recreational facilities must be provided:
 
 
         All required open space and recreational facilities are in addition to the required front and street side setbacks. Interior side and rear setbacks may be considered as required open spaces and recreation facilities. All required common open space must: 1) be accessible to all residents, 2) be a minimum of five feet in both length and width, and 3) include a minimum of 50 percent of softscape landscaping.
      1.   Adjustments: The Director may approve adjustments from the minimum open space dimensions and landscaping percentage standards as provided in Chapters 22 and 23 of this Title.
   K.   Building Wall Modulation: No plane of a building wall facing a property line shall exceed 24 feet in height or length without at least a two-foot offset for a minimum length of six feet in the wall plane. When expanding or adding onto the height or length of an existing building wall, only the expansion or addition shall not exceed 24 feet without wall modulation. Below is an example of wall modulation for walls up to 30 feet:

 

   L.   Landscaping:
      1.   Except where not allowed per the placement of existing utilities, one deciduous or evergreen on-site tree must be provided per 25 feet of street-facing frontage length along the front-yard, rear-yard, and street-facing side-yard setbacks.
         a.   Trees must be planted within a maximum of ten feet of the property line.
      2.   Those setback areas fronting upon a public street must incorporate a minimum of 50 percent softscape and a maximum of 50 percent hardscape in the landscape, except for those portions devoted to vehicular parking. In addition, those portions of the property which abut a different zoning classification must be landscaped with trees and shrubs to provide an effective buffer from adjoining property.
      3.   The setback areas may contain artificial turf or synthetic grass in the side and rear yards only, provided that it: 1) is not harmful to the environment (such as containing lead based or other hazardous materials); 2) includes a pervious surface to address percolation, drainage, runoff, and stormwater detention requirements; and 3) is incorporated into a comprehensive landscaping design and site plan.
      4.   Drought-tolerant plants must be utilized in the landscape.
   M.   Condominium Conversions: Condominiums and stock cooperatives converted from multiple-family dwellings shall meet all the requirements for condominiums in effect at the time they were originally constructed. If there were no condominium standards in effect at the time of construction, the conversion shall comply with the condominium standards of ordinance 898, adopted January 20, 1976.
   N.   Detached Accessory Buildings:
      1.   Unless permitted as an accessory dwelling unit pursuant to article 15-4E of this title, buildings shall not contain a kitchen or kitchen facilities, a bathtub or shower and shall not be used for sleeping purposes.
      2.   Detached accessory buildings, except detached accessory dwelling units, shall not be rented or used as a separate dwelling unit or as an “R” occupancy, as defined by the California Building Code, except that they may contain a sink and a toilet.
      3.   Prior to issuance of a building permit for a detached accessory structure, except a detached accessory dwelling unit, the Director shall require the recording of a covenant to run with the land, which states that the accessory structure shall not be used as a dwelling unit or used in violation of this subsection. (Ord. 1648, 6-21-2023; amd. Ord. 1657, 5-7-2024)
15-4D-4: LANDSCAPING:
   A.   Landscaping and irrigation must be provided within the front yard and street side setback areas.
   B.   Those setback areas fronting upon a public street must incorporate a combination of softscape and hardscape in the landscape, except for those portions devoted to vehicular parking. In addition, those portions of the property which abut a different zoning classification must be landscaped with trees and shrubs to provide an effective buffer from adjoining property.
   C.   The setback areas may contain artificial turf or synthetic grass provided that it: 1) is not harmful to the environment (such as containing lead based or other hazardous materials); 2) includes a pervious surface to address percolation, drainage, runoff, and stormwater detention requirements; and 3) is incorporated into a comprehensive landscaping design and site plan. (Ord. 1648, 6-21-2023)
15-4D-5: OFF STREET PARKING AND LOADING SPACES:
Off-street parking shall be provided as required by chapter 15 of this title. (Ord. 1648, 6-21-2023)
15-4D-6: SIGNS:
Signs in the R-3 Zone shall comply with the requirements of chapter 18 of this title. (Ord. 1648, 6-21-2023)
15-4D-7: VEHICULAR ACCESS:
Where an R-3 lot abuts an alley, vehicular access to the lot must be from the alley. Curb cuts and driveways must be installed in conformance with ESMC subsection 15-15-5O. (Ord. 1648, 6-21-2023)
ARTICLE E. ACCESSORY DWELLING UNITS
SECTION:
15-4E-1: Purpose; Findings
15-4E-2: General Requirements
15-4E-3: Development Standards
15-4E-4: Development Standards For Government Code Section 66323 ADUs
15-4E-5: Application Process; Fees
15-4E-6: Utility Connections
15-4E-1: PURPOSE; FINDINGS:
   This article is adopted pursuant to Government Code section 66314 for the purpose of implementing the City’s regulation of accessory dwelling units.
   Government Code section 66323(a) requires the City ministerially approve certain accessory dwelling units in certain residential or mixed use zones within the City. On the other hand, Government Code section 66314(a), allows the designation of areas for accessory dwelling units “based on the adequacy of water and sewer services and the impact of accessory dwelling units on traffic flow and public safety.”
   The City Council finds that the conditions that were cited in Ordinance No. 1381 that existed in the City at the time (for example, increased traffic, relatively high density of housing in a small area, and intense on-street parking) continue to exist within the City. While the City Council recognizes that accessory dwelling units present a potential solution to the state’s housing crisis, the Council continues to believe that accessory dwelling units increase the volume of vehicle traffic within the City, on-street parking, and noise, and can introduce pollutants into the City’s storm drains.
   By adopting this chapter, the City Council desires to comply with state law while reserving its right to conduct studies evaluating the adequacy of water and sewer services.
(Ord. 1550, 7-5-2017; amd. Ord. 1613, 2-4-2020; Ord. 1668, 2-18-2025)
15-4E-2: GENERAL REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Locations: Accessory dwelling units are permitted by right throughout any zone where residential uses are permitted. Accessory dwelling units may be: 1) contained within the existing or proposed space of a single-family residence or attached to a single-family residence, 2) within the space of an existing accessory structure, or 3) detached from the single-family residence, subject to the requirements and development standards in this Code and State law.
   B.   Conjunction With Single-Family Or Multi-Family Dwelling: An accessory dwelling unit may only be constructed in conjunction with either an existing or proposed single-family dwelling, or an existing or proposed multi-family dwelling.
   C.   Certificates Of Occupancy: The City shall not issue a certificate of occupancy for an accessory dwelling unit before a certificate of occupancy is issued for the primary dwelling or dwellings.
   D.   Separate Sale Prohibited: Accessory dwelling units may not be sold separately from a primary dwelling, except when the ADU or the primary dwelling was built or developed by a qualified nonprofit corporation and meets all the requirements of Government Code section 66341, including any amendments or successor statutes thereto.
   E.   Minimum Rental Term. Rental of the accessory dwelling unit must be for a term of thirty (30) consecutive days or longer.
   F.   Release Of Covenant: In the event a covenant was previously recorded for a permitted accessory structure restricting the structure as non-habitable pursuant to subsection 15-4B-3(H)(5) of this chapter, before the City issues a building permit for an accessory dwelling unit, the property owner must record a release of such covenant with the County Recorder, in a form approved by the Director of Community Development and the City Attorney.
   G.   The City may not condition its approval of the permit application by requiring the applicant correct a non-conforming zoning condition, as that term is defined in Government Code section 66313. This protection applies to a previously unpermitted accessory dwelling unit constructed before January 1, 2020.
(Ord. 1550, 7-5-2017; Ord. 1613, 2-4-2020; Ord. 1620, 11-17-2020; Ord. 1639, 9-20-2022; Ord. 1668, 2-18-2025)
15-4E-3: DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS:
Unless otherwise preempted by Title 7, Division 1, Chapter 13 (Accessory Dwelling Units) of the Government Code, accessory dwelling units must meet the development standards applicable to accessory structures in the zone in which they are situated, except as follows:
   A.   Height: Same as residential structures in the R-1 Zone.
   B.   Setbacks:
      1.   Attached To And/Or Within A Primary Dwelling: Same as primary dwellings in the zone in which they are situated. If the primary dwelling has a non-conforming setback, the accessory dwelling portion may maintain the same setback.
      2.   Detached From A Primary Dwelling: The detached accessory dwelling unit must be set back no less than four feet (4') from the interior side and rear lot lines.
      3.   Exception: No setback shall apply to a portion of an existing structure that is converted to an accessory dwelling unit.
   C.   Building Area:
      1.   Attached to a primary dwelling and/or within the primary dwelling: Maximum of forty-nine percent (49%) of the total floor area of the combined dwellings.
      2.   Detached: Maximum of one thousand two hundred (1,200) square feet.
      3.   The total area of the primary dwelling and the accessory dwelling unit may not exceed the maximum permitted floor area of the lot, except an existing structure is converted to an accessory dwelling unit.
      4.   Nothing in this chapter is meant to prohibit an accessory dwelling unit up to eight hundred fifty (850) square feet, or one thousand (1,000) square feet for a two (2) bedroom unit.
   D.   Density:
      1.   Lots with a proposed or existing single-family dwelling:
         a.   One accessory dwelling unit and one junior accessory dwelling unit per lot within a proposed or existing single-family dwelling or existing accessory structure, and/or
         b.   One accessory dwelling unit detached from the primary structure or attached to an accessory structure that may be combined with one junior accessory dwelling unit per lot.
      2.   Lots with a proposed or existing multifamily dwelling structure:
         a.   One accessory dwelling unit within the portions of existing multifamily dwelling structures that are not used as livable space, provided each unit complies with state building standards for dwellings, and multiple accessory dwelling units up to a maximum of twenty-five percent (25%) of the existing multifamily dwelling units. For purposes of this subsection, "livable space" means a space in a dwelling intended for human habitation, including living, sleeping, eating, cooking, or sanitation. Portions of existing multi-family dwelling structures that are not used as livable space, include, but are not limited to, storage rooms, boiler rooms, passageways, attics, basements, or garages.
         b.   Not more than eight detached accessory dwelling units on a lot with an existing multifamily dwelling structure. However, the number of accessory dwelling units allowable pursuant to this clause shall not exceed the number of existing units on the lot.
         c.   Not more than two detached accessory dwelling units on a lot with a proposed multifamily dwelling structure.
   E.   Parking:
      1.   No parking spaces are required for accessory dwelling units.
      2.   When a garage, carport, covered parking structure, or dedicated uncovered parking space is demolished in conjunction with the construction of an accessory dwelling unit, or converted to an accessory dwelling unit, replacement parking for the lost spaces is not required. In addition, removal of a curb cut and/or driveway rendered nonconforming due to the construction of an accessory dwelling unit is not required.
   F.   Separate Entrance: If the accessory dwelling unit is attached to or within the primary dwelling and has independent exterior access from the proposed or existing primary dwelling, such independent exterior access may not be an entrance facing the front yard. An independent and separate entrance to the accessory dwelling unit must be located on the side or at the rear of the primary dwelling.
   G.   Compliance: The accessory dwelling unit must comply with applicable Building, Health and Fire Codes except where explicitly exempted by Government Code section 66314. Fire sprinklers for accessory dwelling units are required only when they are required for the primary dwelling on the lot.
(Ord. 1550, 7-5-2017; Ord. 1613, 2-4-2020; Ord. 1648, 6-21-2023; Ord. 1668, 2-18-2025)
15-4E-4: DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS FOR GOVERNMENT CODE SECTION 66323 ADUS:
Notwithstanding Section 15-4E-3, the following ADU types are permitted by right in residential or mixed-use zones and are subject only to the development and/or design standards listed in this section as stated in Government Code Section 66323.
   A.   Permitted ADU Types and Standards:
      1.   Single-family dwelling - Attached ADUs. One accessory dwelling unit and one junior accessory dwelling unit per lot with a proposed or existing single-family dwelling if all the following apply:
         a.   The accessory dwelling unit or junior accessory dwelling unit is within the proposed space of a single-family dwelling or accessory structure and may include an expansion of not more than one hundred and fifty (150) square feet beyond the same physical dimensions as the existing accessory structure. An expansion beyond the physical dimensions of the existing accessory structure shall be limited to accommodating ingress and egress.
         b.   The space has exterior access from the proposed or existing single-family dwelling.
         c.   The side and rear setbacks are sufficient for fire and safety.
         d.   The junior accessory dwelling unit complies with the requirements of the Government Code Section 66333 et seq.
      2.   Single-family dwelling - Detached ADUs. One detached, new construction, accessory dwelling unit that does not exceed four-foot (4') side and rear yard setbacks for a lot with a proposed or existing single-family dwelling. The accessory dwelling unit may be combined with a junior accessory dwelling unit described in subparagraph (1), above. These detached accessory dwelling units must meet the following standards:
         a.   The total floor area must not exceed eight hundred (800) square feet.
         b.   The height must not exceed the maximum permitted height in the Single-Family Residential (R-1) zone.
      3.   Multifamily dwelling structures - Attached ADUs.
         a.   Multiple accessory dwelling units within portions of existing multifamily dwelling structures that are not used as livable space, including, but not limited to, storage rooms, boiler rooms, passageways, attics, basements, or garages, if each unit complies with state building standards for dwellings.
         b.   Density. At least one accessory dwelling unit within an existing multifamily dwelling and up to twenty-five percent (25%) of the existing multifamily dwelling units.
      4.   Multifamily dwelling - Detached ADUs.
         a.   Multiple accessory dwelling units that are located on a lot that has an existing or proposed multifamily dwelling, but are detached from the multifamily dwelling. These detached accessory dwelling units must meet the following standards:
            (1)   The height must not exceed the maximum permitted height in the Single-Family Residential (R-1) zone.
            (2)   The rear and side yard setbacks must be a minimum of four feet (4').
            (3)   On a lot with an existing multifamily dwelling, not more than eight detached accessory dwelling units. However, the number of accessory dwelling units allowable pursuant to this clause shall not exceed the number of existing units on the lot.
            (4)   On a lot with a proposed multifamily dwelling, not more than two (2) detached accessory dwelling units.
         b.   If the existing multifamily dwelling has a rear or side setback of less than four feet (4'), the existing multifamily dwelling is not required to be modified to comply with a minimum setback as a condition of approving the application to construct an accessory dwelling unit that satisfies the requirements of this subparagraph (4).
   B.   No additional development or design standards are required for any accessory dwelling unit that meets the requirements of subsection 15-4E-4(A).
   C.   Accessory dwelling units that meet the requirements in subsection 15-4E-4(A) must also comply with the General Requirements in Section 15-4E-2.
   D.   The installation of fire sprinklers is not required in an accessory dwelling unit if sprinklers are not required for the primary residence. The construction of an accessory dwelling unit shall not trigger a requirement for fire sprinklers to be installed in the existing multifamily dwelling.
(Ord. 1668, 2-18-2025)
15-4E-5: APPLICATION PROCESS; FEES:
   A.   Any application for a building permit to create an accessory dwelling unit on a lot with an existing single-family dwelling or multi-family dwelling units shall be ministerially approved or denied within 60 days of the City's receipt of a completed application. If a completed application is not approved or denied within 60 days, the application shall be deemed approved. However, any permit application for an accessory dwelling unit that is submitted with a permit application to create a single-family dwelling shall be considered ministerially but is not subject to the 60 day requirement to allow the City time to act on the permit application to create the new single-family dwelling, if necessary. If an application for an ADU is denied, staff shall return in writing a full set of comments to the applicant with a list of items that are defective or deficient and a description of how the application can be remedied by the applicant.
   B.   For an accessory dwelling unit of 750 square feet or more, the applicant must pay development impact fees imposed pursuant to Chapter 32 of this title, in an amount set by City Council resolution, provided that such development impact fee is proportional in relation to the square footage of the primary dwelling unit.
   C.   Notwithstanding subsection B above, a previously unpermitted accessory dwelling unit constructed before January 1, 2020, shall not be required to pay impact fees or connection or capacity charges except when utility infrastructure is required to comply with Section 17920.3 of the Health and Safety Code regarding substandard buildings.
(Ord. 1550, 7-5-2017; Ord. 1613, 2-4-2020; Ord. 1648, 6-21-2023; Ord. 1668, 2-18-2025)
15-4E-6: UTILITY CONNECTIONS:
   A.   An accessory dwelling unit shall not be considered a new residential use for purposes of calculating connection fees or capacity charges for utilities, unless the accessory dwelling unit is constructed simultaneously with a new single-family dwelling.
   B.   The City may require a new or separate utility connection directly between the accessory dwelling unit and the utility, and may require the payment of a connection fee or capacity charge for any accessory dwelling unit, unless the accessory dwelling unit is an accessory dwelling unit or junior accessory dwelling unit within the proposed space of a single-family dwelling or existing space of a single-family dwelling or accessory structure, in which event no new or separate utility connection may be required. 
(Ord. 1613, 2-4-2020; amd. Ord. 1668, 2-18-2025)
ARTICLE F. JUNIOR ACCESSORY DWELLING UNITS
SECTION:
15-4F-1: Purpose
15-4F-2: General Requirements
15-4F-3: Development Standards
15-4F-4: Application Process; Fees
15-4F-5: Utility Connections
15-4F-1: PURPOSE:
This article is adopted pursuant to Government Code section 65852.22, for the purpose of implementing the City's regulation of junior accessory dwelling units.
(Ord. 1613, 2-4-2020)
15-4F-2: GENERAL REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Permit Required: A permit must be obtained to create a junior accessory dwelling unit.
   B.   Density: One (1) junior accessory dwelling unit per residential lot zoned for single-family residences with a single-family residence built, or proposed to be built, on the lot.
   C.   Owner Occupancy Required: The owner must reside in the single-family residence in which the junior accessory dwelling unit will be permitted. The owner may reside in either the remaining portion of the structure or the newly created junior accessory dwelling unit. Owner-occupancy shall not be required if the owner is another governmental agency, land trust, or housing organization.
   D.   Recordation Of A Deed Restriction Required: The applicant must record a deed restriction which includes both of the following:
      1.   A prohibition on the sale of the junior accessory dwelling unit separate from the sale of the single-family residence, including a statement that the deed restriction may be enforced against future purchasers.
      2.   A restriction on the size and attributes of the junior accessory dwelling unit that conforms with this section.
   E.   The City may not condition its approval of the permit application by requiring the applicant correct a non-conforming zoning condition, as that term is defined in Government Code section 66313. This protection applies to a previously unpermitted junior accessory dwelling unit constructed before January 1, 2020.
(Ord. 1613, 2-4-2020; amd. Ord. 1668, 2-18-2025)
15-4F-3: DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS:
   A.   A permitted junior accessory dwelling unit must be constructed within the walls of the proposed or existing single-family residence.
   B.   Separate Entrance Required: A junior accessory dwelling must include a separate entrance from the main entrance to the proposed or existing single-family residence.
   C.   Efficiency Kitchen Required: A junior accessory dwelling unit must include an efficiency kitchen, which shall include all of the following:
      1.   A cooking facility with appliances.
      2.   A food preparation counter and storage cabinets that are of reasonable size in relation to the size of the junior accessory dwelling unit.
   D.   Parking: No additional parking is required for a junior accessory dwelling unit.
(Ord. 1613, 2-4-2020)
15-4F-4: APPLICATION PROCESS; FEES:
   A.   Any application for a building permit to create a junior accessory dwelling unit on a lot with an existing single-family shall be ministerially approved within sixty (60) days of the City's receipt of a completed application. Any permit application for a junior accessory dwelling unit that is submitted with a permit application to create a new single-family dwelling shall be considered ministerially but is not subject to the sixty (60) day requirement to allow the City time to act on the permit application to create the new single-family dwelling, if necessary.
   B.   The applicant must pay any applicable fees.
(Ord. 1613, 2-4-2020)
15-4F-5: UTILITY CONNECTIONS:
A junior accessory dwelling unit shall not be considered a new residential use for purposes of calculating connection fees or capacity charges for utilities.
(Ord. 1613, 2-4-2020)
ARTICLE G. TWO-UNIT RESIDENTIAL DEVELOPMENTS AND URBAN LOT SPLITS IN SINGLE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL (R1) ZONES
SECTION:
15-4G-1: Purpose
15-4G-2: General Requirements; Eligibility
15-4G-3: General Urban Lot Split Development Standards
15-4G-4: Development Standards For Lots Wider Than Twenty-Five Feet
15-4G-5: Development Standards For Lots Twenty-Five Feet Wide Or Less
15-4G-6: Landscaping (All Lots)
15-4G-7: Off Street Parking And Loading Spaces (All Lots)
15-4G-8: Signs (All Lots)
15-4G-9: Vehicular Access (All Lots)
15-4G-10: Application Process; Fees
15-4G-11: Tenancy
15-4G-1:PURPOSE:
This article is adopted pursuant to Government Code section 65852.6, 65852.21, and 66411.7 for the purpose of implementing the City’s regulation of two-unit residential development and/or urban lot splits in the City’s Single-Family Residential Zone.
Government Code section 65852.21(a) requires the City ministerially approve certain housing developments containing no more than two residential units within a single-family residential zone. Government Code section 66411.7(a) requires that the City ministerially approve a parcel map for an urban lot split, subject to standards set forth in Government Code section 66411.7(a)(1), (2), and (3). (Ord. 1672, 5-20-2025)
15-4G-2: GENERAL REQUIREMENTS; ELIGIBILITY:
   A.   Notwithstanding the standards outlined in this Article G of Chapter 4 of Title 15 of this code, all other standards provided in Articles A and B of Chapter 4 of Title 15 of this code will apply, unless prohibited by state law.
   B.   A parcel proposed for a subdivision (lot splits) pursuant to this article must meet the requirements in subdivision (a) of Government Code Section 66411.7.
   C.   A proposed housing development proposing a two-unit residential development (duplex) pursuant to this article must meet the requirements in subdivision (a) of Government Code Section 65852.21. (Ord. 1672, 5-20-2025)
15-4G-3: GENERAL URBAN LOT SPLIT DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS:
All urban lot splits with two-unit residential developments within the R-1 Zone must comply with the R-1 development standards contained in Article 15-4B and the development standards of this Article 15-4G. If there are conflicts between the provisions of Article 15-4B and this Article 15-4G, the provisions of this Section will govern.
   A.   Urban lot splits must incorporate all built-form parameters of State of California Government Code Section 66411.7, including:
      1.   A parcel map that subdivides an existing R-1 parcel will create no more than two new parcels of approximately equal lot area and with one of the two created parcels not smaller than 40 percent of the lot area of the original parcel proposed for subdivision. See Figure 4G-1.
      2.   Both newly created parcels will be no smaller than 1,200 square feet in gross area.
      3.   No more than two dwelling units per lot will be constructed on a R-1 urban lot split.
      4.   Accessory Dwelling Units or Junior Accessory Dwelling Units are prohibited where an Urban Lot Split is also developed with a two-unit residential development pursuant to Sections 15-4G-4 and 15-4G-5.
      5.   A minimum of one off-street parking spaces will be provided per newly constructed dwelling unit. No parking is required if the parcel is located within one-half mile walking distance of a High-quality Transit Corridor or major transit stop or if a car share vehicle is located within one-block of the parcel.
   B.   Lot line splits will be parallel to public street frontages. See Figure 4G-2.
   C.   When cross easements across lot split parcels are required to provide access to units, or access to vehicle parking spaces, or access to utilities and utility connections, or access between lot split parcels, or access for any other purpose, a covenant establishing the cross easement acceptable to the Community Development Department must be recorded with the Los Angeles County Recorder upon the filing of the Final Parcel Map described in chapter 14-6 of this code.

 
Figure 4G-1

 
Figure 4G-2
(Ord. 1672, 5-20-2025)
15-4G-4: DEV ELOPMENT STANDARD S FOR LOTS WIDER THAN TWENTY-F IVE FEET:
All two-unit residential developments and urban lot splits on lots that are wider than 25 feet within the R-1 Zone must comply with the development standards contained in this section.
   A.   General Provisions: As provided in ESMC Section 15-4B-3 (Single-Family Residential Site Development Standards for Lots Wider than Twenty-Five Feet)
   B.   Height: As provided in ESMC Section 15-4B-3 (Single-Family Residential Site Development Standards for Lots Wider than Twenty-Five Feet)
   C.   Lot Area: As provided in ESMC Section 15-4G-3 above.
   D.   Setbacks:
      1.   Front Yard: A minimum of 22 feet. Front yard setbacks for two car and three car garages located in the front half of a lot must comply with the standards contained in subsection H of this section.
         a.   Permitted front yard setback encroachments:
         (1)   Porches or verandas in a front yard setback not fully enclosed on three sides (railings and/or columns permitted) may encroach into the front setback a maximum of six feet;
         (2)   The first floor front yard setback facing exterior wall of a dwelling may encroach up to two feet for a width not exceeding 30 feet when a first floor porch or veranda, not fully enclosed on three sides, is also projecting into the front yard setback. The total amount of encroachment may not exceed six feet in depth combined for both the dwelling structure and a porch or veranda, for a minimum 50 percent of the building width;
         (3)   Raised decks, where the walking surface is not greater than 24 inches above adjacent grade, in conjunction with a lattice deck cover not greater than 10 feet above adjacent grade may encroach into the front yard setback a maximum of six feet in depth and 50 percent of the building width;
         (4)   Lattice patio covers, pergolas, arbors, or trellises not greater than 10 feet above adjacent grade (as measured from the lowest adjacent grade to the highest point of the cover) may encroach into the front yard setback a maximum of six feet in depth and 50 percent of the building width;
         (5)   Architectural elements such as towers or turrets not greater than eight feet in diameter may encroach into the front setback a maximum of four feet;
      2.   Side Yard: Primary structures must maintain a minimum setback on each side of the lot of 10 percent of the width of the lot, but can never be less than three feet and need not be more than four feet.
      3.   Rear Yard: Primary structures must maintain a minimum setback of four feet on the first and second floors.
      Notwithstanding Subsections D.1 through D.3 above, the City may not condition its approval of a two-unit residential development by requiring the applicant to correct a non-conforming setback for an existing structure or a new structure constructed in the same location and to the same dimensions of an existing structure.
      4.   Setbacks for detached accessory structures: As provided in ESMC Section 15-4B-3 (Single-Family Residential Site Development Standards for Lots Wider than Twenty-Five Feet)
   E.   Lot Width: As provided in ESMC Section 15-4B-3 (Single-Family Residential Site Development Standards for Lots Wider than Twenty-Five Feet)
   F.   Minimum Unit Size: As provided in ESMC Section 15-4B-3 (Single-Family Residential Site Development Standards for Lots Wider than Twenty-Five Feet)
   G.   Floor Area Ratio:
      1.   The maximum total building area on the lot shall not exceed an overall floor area ratio (FAR) of 0.60. There is no minimum building size.
      2.   The maximum FAR for the second floor of the primary structure shall not exceed 0.25.
      3.   In calculating the overall FAR, floor area is measured to the interior of a building’s perimeter walls and shall include all floors of the primary dwelling (i.e., main structure), attached and detached accessory dwelling units, habitable attic space, accessory buildings, balconies, decks, verandas, and porches.
      4.   Areas where the vertical measurement between the floor and ceiling directly above is 14 feet or more shall be counted on both the first and second stories for FAR calculations (areas such as rotundas, spaces with vaulted ceilings, and other similar areas with volume).
      5.   Stairs and elevators are counted once and are applied to the first floor.
      6.   For purposes of calculating floor area, the following are not included:
         a.   Basements as defined in section 15-1-6 of this title;
         b.   Up to 500 square feet of interior floor area of an attached or detached garage;
         c.   Detached accessory structures measuring not more than 120 square feet;
         d.   First floor decks, verandas and porches under 30 inches in height (as measured from adjacent grade to the walking surface).
         e.   Up to 500 square feet cumulative of first floor decks, verandas and porches, covered or uncovered, attached or detached, and at least 30 inches in height (as measured from adjacent grade to the walking surface), provided that the deck, veranda or porch is at least 50 percent open on the sides.
         f.   Second floor balconies and decks that are not covered.
         g.   Up to 12 square feet of second floor decks and balconies that are covered by roof, lattice or trellis.
         h.   The area of decks, balconies, verandas or porches covered by eave projections up to 18 inches.
      7.   Nothing in this Chapter is meant to prohibit a residential dwelling unit of at least 800 square feet of total floor area.
   H.   Placement of buildings and structures: As provided in ESMC Section 15-4B-3 (Single-Family Residential Site Development Standards for Lots Wider than Twenty-Five Feet)
   I.   Entry Orientation: As provided in ESMC Section 15-4B-3 (Single-Family Residential Site Development Standards for Lots Wider than Twenty-Five Feet)
   J.   Detached accessory buildings as defined in section 15-1-6 of this Title: As provided in ESMC Section 15-4B-3 (Single-Family Residential Site Development Standards for Lots Wider than Twenty-Five Feet). (Ord. 1672, 5-20-2025)
15-4G-5: DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS FOR LOTS TWENTY-FIVE FEET WIDE OR LESS:
All two-unit residential developments and urban lot splits on lots that are 25 feet wide or less within the R-1 Zone must comply with the development standards contained in this section.
   A.   General Provisions: As provided in ESMC Section 15-4B-3-1 (Single-Family Residential Site Development Standards for Lots Twenty-Five Feet Wide or Less)
   B.   Height: As provided in ESMC Section 15-4B-3-1 (Single-Family Residential Site Development Standards for Lots Twenty-Five Feet Wide or Less)
   C.   Lot area: As provided in ESMC Section 15-4G-3 above.
   D.   Setbacks:
      1.   Front Yard: A minimum of 22 feet.
         a.   Permitted front yard setback encroachments:
         (1)   Porches or verandas in a front yard setback not fully enclosed on three sides (railings and/or columns permitted) may encroach into the front setback a maximum of six feet;
         (2)   The first floor front yard setback facing exterior wall of a dwelling may encroach up to two feet for a width not exceeding 30 feet when a first floor porch or veranda, not fully enclosed on three sides, is also projecting into the front yard setback. The total amount of encroachment may not exceed six feet in depth combined for both the dwelling structure and a porch or veranda, for a minimum 50 percent of the building width;
         (3)   Raised decks, where the walking surface is not greater than 24 inches above adjacent grade, in conjunction with a lattice deck cover not greater than 10 feet above adjacent grade may encroach into the front yard setback a maximum of six feet in depth and 50 percent of the building width;
         (4)   Lattice patio covers, pergolas, arbors, or trellises not greater than 10 feet above adjacent grade (as measured from the lowest adjacent grade to the highest point of the cover) may encroach into the front yard setback a maximum of six feet in depth and 50 percent of the building width;
         (5)   Architectural elements such as towers or turrets not greater than eight feet in diameter may encroach into the front setback a maximum of four feet.
      2.   Side Yard: A minimum of three feet.
      3.   Detached accessory structures and garages: Detached accessory structures and attached garages are allowed along the property line on one interior side lot line, provided that the detached accessory structure or attached garage is in the rear one-third of the lot.
      4.   Rear Yard: Primary structures must maintain a minimum setback of four feet on the first and second floors.
      5.   Detached accessory structures and garages: Detached accessory structures and garages are allowed a rear yard setback of zero feet on the first story and must maintain a rear yard setback of four feet on the second story.
      Notwithstanding Subsections D.1 through D.5 above, the City may not condition its approval of a two-unit residential development by requiring the applicant to correct a non-conforming setback for an existing structure or a new structure constructed in the same location and to the same dimensions of an existing structure.
   E.   Lot Width: As provided in ESMC Section 15-4B-3-1 (Single-Family Residential Site Development Standards for Lots Twenty-Five Feet Wide or Less)
   F.   Minimum Unit Size: As provided in ESMC Section 15-4B-3-1 (Single-Family Residential Site Development Standards for Lots Twenty-Five Feet Wide or Less)
   G.   Placement of Buildings and Structures: As provided in ESMC Section 15-4B-3-1 (Single-Family Residential Site Development Standards for Lots Twenty-Five Feet Wide or Less)
   H.   Entry Orientation: As provided in ESMC Section 15-4B-3-1 (Single-Family Residential Site Development Standards for Lots Twenty-Five Feet Wide or Less)
   I.   Building Wall Modulation: As provided in ESMC Section 15-4B-3-1 (Single-Family Residential Site Development Standards for Lots Twenty-Five Feet Wide or Less)
   J.   Detached accessory buildings as defined in section 15-1-6 of this Title: As provided in ESMC Section 15-4B-3-1 (Single-Family Residential Site Development Standards for Lots Twenty-Five Feet Wide or Less). (Ord. 1672, 5-20-2025)
15-4G-6: LANDSCAPING (ALL LOTS):
As provided in ESMC Section 15-4B-4 (Single Family Residential Landscaping - All Lots). (Ord. 1672, 5-20-2025)
15-4G-7: OFF STREET PARKING AND LOADING SPACES (ALL LOTS):
Off street parking must be provided as required by chapter 15 of this title, except that only a minimum of one off-street parking space must be provided per newly constructed dwelling unit. No parking is required if a parcel is located within ½ mile walking distance of a High-quality Transit Corridor or major transit stop or if a car share vehicle is located within one-block of the parcel. (Ord. 1672, 5-20-2025)
15-4G-8: SIGNS (ALL LOTS):
As provided in ESMC Section 15-4B-6 (Single Family Residential Signs - All Lots). (Ord. 1672, 5-20-2025)
15-4G-9: VEHICULAR ACCESS (ALL LOTS):
As provided in ESMC Section 15-4B-7 (Single Family Residential Vehicular Access - All Lots). (Ord. 1672, 5-20-2025)
15-4G-10: APPLICATION PROCESS; FEES:
Any application for a building permit to create a two-unit residential development or a lot created pursuant to an Urban Lot Split in compliance with this Article on a single-family residential lot will be ministerially approved. Properties developed under this section will be subject to all applicable fees, including development impact fees, and assessments. (Ord. 1672, 5-20-2025)
15-4G-11: TENANCY:
   A.   Each unit created under this chapter may be rented separately, however rental terms must not be less than 31 consecutive days or allow termination of the tenancy prior to the expiration of at least one 31-day period occupancy by the same tenant.
   B.   Urban Lot Split: The applicant for an urban lot split must sign an affidavit, in the form approved by the City Attorney, stating that the applicant intends to occupy one of the housing units on the newly created lots as its principal residence for a minimum of three years from the date of the approval of the Urban Lot Split. This subsection does not apply to an applicant that is a “community land trust,” as defined in clause (ii) of subparagraph (C) of paragraph (11) of subdivision (a) of Section 402.1 of the Revenue and Taxation Code or is a “qualified nonprofit corporation” as described in Section 214.15 of the Revenue and Taxation Code. (Ord. 1672, 5-20-2025)
