CHAPTER 1
TITLE; INTERPRETATION; DEFINITIONS
SECTION:
15-1-1: Purpose; Title
15-1-2: Interpretation
15-1-3: Permissive Ordinance
15-1-4: Enforcement
15-1-5: Severability
15-1-6: Definitions
15-1-1: PURPOSE; TITLE:
A precise land use plan for the City is hereby adopted and established to serve the public health, safety, and general welfare and to provide the economic and social advantages resulting from an orderly planned use of land resources. This title shall be known as the ZONING CODE. This title is the primary tool for implementing the goals, objectives, and policies of the El Segundo General Plan, pursuant to mandated provisions of the State Planning and Zoning Law 1 , the California Environmental Quality Act 2 , and other applicable State and local requirements. (Ord. 1245, 2-6-1996)
 
Notes
15-1-2: INTERPRETATION:
In interpreting and applying the provisions of this title they shall be held to be the minimum requirements for the promotion of the public health, safety, comfort, convenience and general welfare. It is not intended by this title to interfere with or abrogate or annul any easement, covenant or other agreement between parties. When this chapter imposes a greater restriction upon the use of buildings or land or upon the height of buildings, or requires larger open spaces than are imposed or required by other ordinances, rules, regulations or by easements, covenants or agreements, the provisions of this title shall control. (Ord. 1212, 11-16-1993)
15-1-3: PERMISSIVE ORDINANCE:
This title shall be considered a permissive ordinance, whereby only those uses or facilities that are listed are hereby allowed, except as provided through an administrative determination, an administrative use permit, or other discretionary action. (Ord. 1212, 11-16-1993)
15-1-4: ENFORCEMENT:
The Community Development Director or his/her duly designated representative is hereby designated as the enforcing agent of this title and any amendments thereto. The Director or his/her designated representative has the authority to require recordation of restrictive covenants on a property and/or to deny permits to prevent unpermitted changes of use and to fulfill the purpose of this Title. (Ord. 1212, 11-16-1993; amd. Ord. 1315, 1-18-2000; Ord. 1639, 9-20-2022; Ord. 1648, 6-21-2023)
15-1-5: SEVERABILITY:
If any chapter, section, subsection, sentence, clause, or phrase of this title is for any reason held by a court of competent jurisdiction or administrative body to be invalid or unconstitutional, such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of this title. The City Council hereby declares that it would have adopted this title and each chapter, section, subsection, sentence, clause, or phrase thereof irrespective of the fact that any one (1) or more portions of this title might be declared invalid. (Ord. 1245, 2-6-1996)
15-1-6: DEFINITIONS:
The following words and phrases, when used in this title, shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them in this chapter:
   ABUTTING/ABUTTING PROPERTY: Two (2) or more parcels sharing a common boundary of at least one (1) point. However, as used in chapter 24 of this title, this definition shall also include property that is separated only by a street or alley.
   ACCESSIBLE: As pertaining to artworks, see VISIBLE AND ACCESSIBLE.
   ACCESSORY: A building, part of a building or structure, or use which is subordinate to, and the use of which is incidental to, that of the main building, structure or use on the same lot.
   ACCESSORY BUILDING OR STRUCTURE: A building or structure that is physically detached from, on the same lot as, and incidental and subordinate to the principal building or structure. "Accessory building or structure" includes, but is not limited to, accessory dwelling units, garages, gazebos, greenhouses, playhouses, storage and tool sheds, and workshops.
   ACCESSORY DWELLING UNIT: An attached or a detached residential dwelling unit which provides complete independent living facilities for one (1) or more persons. The unit shall include permanent provisions for living, sleeping, eating, cooking, and sanitation on the same parcel as the single-family dwelling is situated. The term "accessory dwelling unit" includes:
   A.   An efficiency unit, as defined in section 17958.1 of the Health and Safety Code.
   B.   A manufactured home, as defined in section 18007 of the Health and Safety Code.
   ACCESSORY DWELLING UNIT, JUNIOR: A unit that is no more than five hundred (500) square feet in size and contained entirely within an existing single-family structure. A “Junior Accessory Dwelling Unit” may include separate sanitation facilities, or may share sanitation facilities with the existing structure.
   ACCESSORY USE: A use of a portion of land or building that is customarily and clearly incidental and subordinate to the principal use of the land or building, is located on the same lot as the principal use and is dependent upon the principal use for the majority of its utilization or activity. Accessory uses typically are very small in proportion to the principal use.
   ADVERTISING DISPLAY: Advertising structures and signs.
   ADVERTISING STRUCTURE: A structure of any kind or character erected or maintained for outdoor advertising purposes on which any poster, bill, printing, painting or other advertisement of any kind whatsoever may be placed, including statuary.
Neither "advertising structures" nor "signs", as used in this title includes:
   A.   Official notices issued by a court or public body or officer;
   B.   Notices posted by any public officer in performance of a public duty or by any person in giving legal notice; and
   C.   Directional, warning or information signs or structures required or authorized by law or by Federal, State or Municipal authority.
   AGGRIEVED PERSON: Any person who testified personally or through a representative at a public hearing or who informed the staff of the Community Development Department in writing, prior to a hearing of an interest in the subject of a hearing; or who, for good cause, was unable to do either; or who feels the action taken on an application was not consistent with facts as presented.
   ALLEY: Any public way or thoroughfare more than ten feet (10'), but not exceeding twenty feet (20') in width, which has been dedicated or deeded to the public for public use.

 
   ALTERATION: Any change or modification of an exterior architectural feature of a designated cultural resource. Alteration shall include, but not be limited to, a changing or modification of structure, architectural details or visual characteristics and the placement or removal of any exterior objects or ornamentation affecting the exterior visual qualities of a designated cultural resource. Alterations shall not include ordinary maintenance and repair.
   ALTERNATE TRANSPORTATION: The use of modes of transportation other than the single passenger motor vehicle, including, but not limited to, car pools, vanpools, bus pools, public transit, walking and bicycling.
   AMENDMENT: A change in the wording, context or substance of this title, or a change in the zone boundaries on the zoning map, which map is a part of this title.
   AMENITIES: Facilities which enhance the operation of a use and make it more attractive to present and future uses.
   ANIMAL HOSPITAL: A place where animals or pets are given medical or surgical treatment and are cared for during the time of such treatment.
   APARTMENT: A residential building designed or used for three (3) or more dwelling units.
   APPEALABLE AREA: The entire Coastal Zone in El Segundo as established on a map adopted as part of the El Segundo Local Coastal Program.
   APPLICABLE DEVELOPMENT: Any development project that is determined to meet or exceed the project size threshold criteria contained in section 15-16-3 of this title.
   APPLICANT: The owner of the property, a developer or tenant utilizing the property and seeking the required permits.
   ARBOR: A shelter of shrubs and branches or of latticework intertwined with plant material usually comprised of climbing vines and flowers.
   ARCHITECTURAL BUILDING FEATURE: A balcony, column, door, eaves, roof, soffit, window or window trim, shutters or other similar three-dimensional permanent exterior element of a building or structure that may not create interior floor area, that provides relief from large flat wall planes, breaks up building wall mass, and lends to the overall form, context and appearance of the building or structure.
   ARCHITECTURAL LANDSCAPE FEATURES: Small landscape structures, such as fountains, arbors, trellises, pergolas, colonnades, statuary, benches, bench walls, landscape planter walls not exceeding three feet (3') in height, and other similar features, as well as works of art which do not contain floor area. Arbors, trellises, pergolas, colonnades, and other similar features, as well as works of art cannot consist of a roof or side walls greater than twenty percent (20%) component solid portions when considered as architectural landscape features. These features are not "structures", as defined in this section, for setback purposes.
   ARTIFICIAL TURF (Also Referred To As SYNTHETIC GRASS): A surface of synthetic fibers made to look like natural grass.
   ARTISTIC OR CULTURAL SERVICES: Performances and experiences, including but not limited to performing arts, literary art, media art, arts education, art events, temporary artworks and festivals.
   ARTWORK: Original creations of art which is intended for and capable of being displayed outdoors, including but not limited to, sculpture, murals, mosaic, fountains, artist-designed landscape features, streetscape features and earthworks. These categories may be realized through such mediums as steel, bronze, stained glass, concrete, wood, ceramic tile and stone, as well as other suitable materials.
   ATTACHED: Having a wall or roof in common with another structure, when referring to dwelling units or garages.
   ATTIC: The space between the ceiling joists of the top floor or story and the roof of a building.
   AUTOMOBILE DISMANTLING: The dismantling or wrecking of used motor vehicles or trailers, or the storage, sale or dumping of dismantled or wrecked vehicles or their parts.
   AUTOMOBILE SERVICES: Automobile repair and maintenance, which includes body and fender work, engine overhauling and replacement, transmission work, automobile painting, and car washing. Automobile services also include as accessory uses: retail sales and services, and storage of tires, car parts and other automobile supplies; limited automobile sales. Automobile sales cannot exceed eight (8) automobiles per month; not more than three (3) automobiles can be displayed at one time.
   AVERAGE VEHICLE RIDERSHIP: The figure calculated by dividing the employee population (at a given work site) by the number of vehicles which are driven by employees (to the work site) arriving at the work site in a four (4) hour window between five o'clock (5:00) A.M. and eleven o'clock (11:00) A.M., excluding public transit vehicles and buses serving multiple work sites.
   BALCONY: A covered or uncovered platform that can be used as a walking surface, projecting outward from the vertical surface/facade of a building or structure, and which is directly accessible from floor area located on the same level as the balcony.
   BASEMENT: Any floor level below the first story in a building that is more than four feet (4') below grade for more than fifty percent (50%) of the total perimeter, or is more than eight feet (8') below "grade" at any point.
   BAY WINDOW: An extension of the wall area into the yard setback area, for purposes of obtaining additional light and space, but not floor area.
   BED AND BREAKFAST INN: Any building containing five (5) or fewer guestrooms intended or designed to be used, or which are used or rented or which are occupied for sleeping purposes by guests. Said use shall not contain ancillary facilities for conferences or personal services, but may provide meals. Guest stays shall be limited to fourteen (14) consecutive days. One dwelling unit, on any floor level, in conformance with the requirements of subsection 15-5B-3E of this title shall be allowed for the use of the proprietor of the bed and breakfast inn.
   BLOCK: Land, or a group of lots, surrounded by streets or other rights-of-way, other than an alley, or land which is designated as a block on any recorded subdivision.
   BUILDING: Any structure used or intended for supporting or sheltering any use or occupancy that is permanently affixed to the ground and contains a roof. Shipping containers are not buildings.
   BUILDING AREA: See definition of floor area (gross).
   BUILDING FACE: Horizontal plane of a building facade which may include recessed portions of the building.
   BUILDING HEIGHT OR STRUCTURE HEIGHT: Is the vertical distance measured from the grade plane to the highest point of the roof or parapet. See features listed in section 15-2-3 of this title for exceptions to building height.

 
   BUILDING, MAIN: A building in which the principal use of the site is conducted.
   BUILDING SITE:
   A.   The ground area of one lot; or
   B.   The ground area of two (2) or more lots when used in combination for a building or group of buildings, together with all open spaces as required by this title.
   BUS POOL: A vehicle carrying sixteen (16) or more passengers commuting on a regular basis to and from work following a relatively fixed route and schedule.
   BUSINESS: An establishment intended for the conduct, service, or administration by a commercial enterprise, or offices for the conduct of professional or activities service.
   CAFE: See definition of restaurant, cafe.
   CALIFORNIA ENVIRONMENTAL QUALITY ACT (CEQA) 1 : A statute that requires all jurisdictions in the State of California to evaluate the extent of environmental degradation posed by proposed development.
   CANNABIS: All parts of the plant Cannabis sativa Linnaeus, Cannabis indica, or Cannabis ruderalis, whether growing or not; the seeds thereof; the resin, whether crude or purified, extracted from any part of the plant; and every compound, manufacture, salt, derivative, mixture, or preparation of the plant, its seeds, or resin, including cannabis infused in foodstuff or any other ingestible or consumable product containing cannabis. "Cannabis" also means the separated resin, whether crude or purified, obtained from cannabis. The term "cannabis" includes "medical cannabis" for the purposes set forth in the Compassionate Use Act of 1996 (Proposition 215), found at section 11362.5 of the Health and Safety Code. "Cannabis" does not include the mature stalks of the plant, fiber produced from the stalks, oil or cake made from the seeds of the plant, any other compound, manufacture, salt, derivative, mixture, or preparation of the mature stalks (except the resin extracted therefrom), fiber, oil, or cake, or the sterilized seed of the plant which is incapable of germination. "Cannabis" does not mean "industrial hemp" as defined by section 11018.5 of the Health and Safety Code.
   CANNABIS ACCESSORIES: Any equipment, products or materials of any kind which are used or designed for use in planting, propagating, cultivating, growing, harvesting, manufacturing, compounding, converting, producing, processing, preparing, testing, analyzing, smoking, or vaporizing cannabis, or for ingesting, inhaling, or otherwise introducing cannabis or cannabis products into the human body.
   CANNABIS CULTIVATION: Any activity involving the planting, growing, cultivating, harvesting, drying, curing, grading, trimming or processing of cannabis.
   CANNABIS CULTIVATION FACILITY: A facility where cannabis is cultivated, prepared, and packaged for sale to cannabis dispensaries, to cannabis product manufacturing facilities, or to other cannabis cultivation facilities, but not to consumers.
   CANNABIS DELIVERY: The commercial transfer of cannabis or cannabis products to a customer. "Delivery" also includes the use by a retailer of any technology platform owned and controlled by the retailer, or independently licensed under this division, that enables customers to arrange for or facilitate the commercial transfer by a licensed retailer of cannabis or cannabis products.
   CANNABIS DISPENSARY: A facility or location, whether fixed or mobile, where cannabis, cannabis products, or devices for the use of cannabis are offered, made available to, or provided, either individually or in any combination, with or without remuneration, for medical, recreational, or other purposes.
   CANNABIS DISTRIBUTION: The procurement, sale, and transport of cannabis and cannabis products between State-licensed entities for commercial use purposes.
   CANNABIS ESTABLISHMENT: A cannabis cultivation facility, a cannabis testing facility, a cannabis product manufacturing facility, or a cannabis dispensary.
   CANNABIS MANUFACTURE: To compound, blend, extract, infuse, or otherwise make or prepare a cannabis product.
   CANNABIS PRODUCT MANUFACTURING FACILITY: A facility where cannabis and cannabis products are manufactured, prepared and packaged for sale to other cannabis product manufacturing facilities or to cannabis dispensaries, but not to consumers.
   CANNABIS PRODUCTS: Cannabis that has undergone a process whereby the plant material has been transformed into a concentrate, including, but not limited to, concentrated cannabis, or an edible or topical product containing cannabis or concentrated cannabis and other ingredients.
   CANNABIS-RELATED ACTIVITY: Any commercial cannabis activity, cultivation of cannabis, delivery of cannabis or cannabis products, distribution of cannabis or cannabis products, dispensing of cannabis or cannabis products, manufacture of cannabis or cannabis products, sale of cannabis or cannabis products, and the operation or establishment of a cannabis or medical cannabis cooperative, dispensary, delivery service, or provider. "Cannabis-related activity" does not include the cultivation, planting, harvesting, drying, processing or possession of up to six (6) cannabis plants at one time by persons twenty one (21) years of age or older when conducted within a single private residence and in a manner consistent with Health and Safety Code section 11362.2 and any other applicable regulations.
   CANNABIS STORAGE FACILITY: A facility used for the storage of cannabis, cannabis products or cannabis accessories.
   CANNABIS TESTING FACILITY: A facility where cannabis is analyzed and certified for safety and potency.
   CAR POOL: A vehicle carrying two (2) to six (6) persons commuting together to and from work on a regular basis in a light or medium duty passenger vehicle.
   CARETAKER UNIT: A dwelling unit in the Smoky Hollow specific plan area used for a caretaker of the property on which it is located and limited to five hundred (500) square feet in area.
   CEILING: The upper interior surface of a room, opposite and directly above, the finish floor or walking surface.
   CERTIFICATE OF APPROPRIATENESS: A certificate issued by the Planning Commission approving any proposed alteration, restoration, construction, removal, relocation, or demolition, in whole or in part, of or to a designated cultural resource.
   CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY: An approval issued by the building official prior to occupancy of a building or structure, and after compliance with all applicable codes and ordinances. No building or structure shall be used or occupied, and no change in the existing occupancy classification of the building or structure or portion thereof shall be made until the building official has issued a certificate of occupancy or a temporary certificate of occupancy as set forth in the Building Code.
   CHARITABLE INSTITUTION: A nonprofit, tax exempt organization generally described by the Internal Revenue Service under any of the following classifications:
   A.   A community chest, corporation, trust fund, or foundation operated for charitable, religious, educational, scientific, literary purposes, or for the prevention of cruelty to children or animals;
   B.   War veterans' organizations; and
   C.   Domestic fraternal societies, orders and associations operating under the lodge system.
   CHURCH: An establishment, the principal purpose which is religious worship and including accessory uses in the principal structure or in separate buildings, including Sunday school rooms, assembly rooms, kitchen, library room, one-family dwelling unit and day nurseries operated by and on the church site, but excluding facilities for residences of or training of religious orders.
   CLUB: An association of persons for some common nonprofit purpose, but not including groups organized primarily to render a service which is customarily carried on as a business.
   COASTAL ZONE: That area of the City of El Segundo included in the State of California Coastal Zone as described in the California Coastal Act 2 .
   COMMERCIAL:
      Financial Institutions: Banks and trust companies, credit agencies, credit unions, investment companies, lending and thrift institutions, securities/commodity contract brokers and dealers, security and commodity exchanges, vehicle finance (equity) leasing agencies. Financial institutions do not include check cashing or payday loan facilities.
      Retail Sales: Alcohol sales (off site), building material stores, convenience stores, general retail stores, and warehouse retail showrooms.
      General Retail Stores: Include sales, without limitation, of appliances, art gallery, artists' supplies, bakeries (retail only), bicycles, books and periodicals, cameras and photographic supplies, clothing and accessories, computer and computer equipment, electronics, department stores, drug and discount stores, collectible items sales, curio, gift and souvenir shops, dry goods, fabric and sewing supplies, florists and houseplant stores (indoor), furniture and home furnishings, grocery stores, hardware, hobby materials, household and kitchen goods, jewelry, luggage and leather goods, musical instruments, parts and accessories, newsstands, orthopedic supplies, pet stores, pet supply stores, pharmacies, religious goods, small wares, specialty shops, sporting goods and equipment, stationery, and toys and games.
      Retail Services: Personal services and business and consumer support services.
      Business And Consumer Support Services: Include, without limitation, establishments primarily providing consumers and businesses with services, including maintenance, repair and service, testing, rental, as well as the following: business equipment repair services (except vehicle repair, see definition of vehicle sales and services: maintenance/repair), computer related services (rental, repair), copying, quick printing, and blueprinting services, equipment rental businesses within buildings, film processing laboratories, heavy equipment repair services where repair occurs on the client site, household appliance and equipment repair services, janitorial and maid services, mail advertising services (reproduction and shipping), photocopying and photofinishing, protective services (other than office related), window cleaning.
      Personal Services: Include, without limitation, barbershops and beauty salons, clothing rental, dry cleaning pick up stores with limited equipment, hair, nail, facial, and personal care, laundromats (self-service laundries), photo development, shoe repair shops, tailors, tanning salons.
      Personal services and business and consumer support services may also include accessory retail sales of products related to the services provided.
   COMMERCIAL CANNABIS ACTIVITY: The cultivation, possession, manufacture, distribution, processing, storing, laboratory testing, packaging, labeling, transportation, delivery, or sale of cannabis and cannabis products.
   COMMERCIAL OR INDUSTRIAL DEVELOPMENT PROJECT: Any project which results in the development of property in any land use categories, except for single- and multi-family residential projects designed for long-term occupancy.
   COMMISSARY: A building, part of a building, or structure, which is utilized primarily in the preparation of food and purveying it to off site locations. Commissaries within the Multimedia Overlay (MMO) District shall demonstrate to the satisfaction of the Director of Community Development that each commissary provides primary service to the multimedia industry.
   COMMISSION: The Planning Commission of the City of El Segundo, California.
   COMMUTER MATCHING SERVICE: Any system, whether by computer, manual, or mapping methods, which matches commuters residing in one (1) common area, working in another common area, and having approximately the same work starting and stopping times.
   CONDOMINIUM: A single dwelling unit in a multiple-family dwelling or structure, which is separately owned and which may be combined with an undivided interest in the common areas and facilities of the property.
   CONGREGATE LIVING HEALTH FACILITY: A residential home that provides inpatient care to not more than six (6) persons, including, but not limited to, basic services such as: medical supervision, twenty four (24) hour skilled nursing and supportive care, pharmacy, dietary, and social recreation. The primary need of congregate living health facility residents shall be for availability of skilled nursing care on a recurring, intermittent, extended, or continuous basis. This care is generally less intense than that provided in skilled nursing facilities.
   CONSTRUCTION: The building of additions to an exterior architectural feature of a designated cultural resource, or the erection of a new principal or accessory building or structure contiguous to a designated cultural resource.
   CONSTRUCTION YARD: An open or predominantly open area used for the purpose of storing building materials and related equipment for use in the construction of buildings or structures.
   COURT: A space, open and unobstructed to the sky, located at or above grade level on a lot and bounded on three (3) or more sides by walls of a building.

 
   COURTYARD: A court that is open to the sky and is adjacent to or within a building mostly or entirely surrounded by walls and/or buildings on all four (4) sides.
   CRAFTS SHOPS (Sales, Lease, And Rentals): An outdoor or indoor area, building, part of a building, structure, or a defined area which is utilized primarily for the manufacture, production, sales, lease, storage, and/or rental of materials utilized in media related production or in their construction, or other activities that in the opinion of the Director of Community Development are similar.
   CULTURAL RESOURCE: On site improvements, buildings, structures, signs, and/or features (including significant trees or other landscaping located thereon) having cultural, architectural or historical significance to the citizens of the City of El Segundo.
   DAYCARE CENTER: Any type of group daycare programs, including nurseries for children of working parents, nursery schools for children under minimum age for education in public schools, parent cooperative nursery schools, playgroups for preschool children and programs covering after school care for school children; provided, the establishment is licensed by the State and the City and is conducted in accordance with State and City requirements.
   DAYCARE, LARGE FAMILY: A home which provides family daycare to seven (7) to twelve (12) children, including children under the age of ten (10) years who reside at the home.
   DAYCARE, SMALL FAMILY: A home which provides family daycare to six (6) or fewer children, including children under the age of ten (10) years who reside at the home.
   DECK: An outdoor platform that can be used as a walking surface and outdoor gathering/activity area, typically extending outward from a house, structure, or other building.
   DEMOLITION: Any act or process that destroys in part, or in whole, a designated cultural resource.
   DESIGNATED CULTURAL RESOURCE: On site improvements, buildings, structures, signs, features (including significant trees or other landscaping), places, place names, exterior architecture features, landmark sites, historic sites, area (including significant trees or landscaping located thereon) having cultural, architectural or historical significance to the citizens of the City that has been designated a cultural resource pursuant to the provisions of this chapter.
   DETACHED: Not having a wall or roof in common with another structure, when referring to dwelling units or garages.
   DEVELOPER: The builder who is responsible for the planning, design and construction of an applicable development project. A developer may be responsible for implementing the provisions of chapter 16 of this title as determined by the property owner.
   DEVELOPMENT: The construction or addition of new building square footage. All calculations shall be based on gross square footage.
   DIGITAL ARTIST: An individual or group whose primary focus is related to the preparation of computer generated product.
   DIRECTOR: The City’s Director of Community Development.
   DISPLAY SURFACE: The area made available by the sign structure for the purpose of displaying the advertising message.
   DRIVE-THROUGH RESTAURANT: See definition of restaurant, drive- through.
   DWELLING:
      Multiple-Family: A building or portion of a building containing three (3) or more dwelling units designed or arranged for occupancy by three (3) or more households living independently in which they may or may not share common entrances and/or other spaces. Individual dwelling units may be owned as condominiums, or offered for rent.
      Primary (Or Main Structure): The principal dwelling on a residential lot, which existed prior to the establishment of a secondary ("second unit") or accessory dwelling unit.
      Single-Family: A building containing no more than one (1) dwelling unit designed for occupancy by not more than one (1) household.
      Two-Family: A building containing no more than two (2) dwelling units, designed or arranged for occupancy by two (2) households living independently.
      Unit: Any building or portion thereof that is used as a complete, independent living facility for one (1) or more persons containing permanent provisions for living, sleeping, eating, cooking, and sanitation, as required by the California Building Code.
      Unit, Accessory: An attached or a detached residential dwelling unit which provides complete independent living facilities for one (1) or more persons. It shall include permanent provisions for living, sleeping, eating, cooking, and sanitation on the same parcel as the single-family dwelling is situated. An accessory dwelling unit also includes the following:
         A.   An efficiency unit, as defined in section 17958.1 of Health and Safety Code.
         B.   A manufactured home, as defined in section 18007 of the Health and Safety Code.
   EAVE: The overhanging lower edge of a roof plane that extends up to eighteen inches (18") beyond the facade of a wall attached to said roof plane.
   EMERGENCY SHELTER: Housing with minimal supportive services for homeless persons that is limited to occupancy of six (6) months or less by a homeless person. No individual or household may be denied emergency shelter because of an inability to pay in accordance with Health and Safety Code section 50801(e).
EMPLOYEE HOUSING: Employer-owned and/or operated living quarters provided for the employer's employees in connection to their employment that ensures the employee residents' health, safety, and welfare, as authorized under Health and Safety Code § 17000 et seq., i.e., the State Employee Housing Act.
   EMPLOYEE PARKING AREA: The portion of total required parking at a development used by on site employees. Unless specified in the City Zoning/Building Code, employee parking shall be calculated as follows:
 
 
   EMPLOYEE TRANSPORTATION COORDINATOR: An employee, tenant, property owner, property manager, contracted service, or an employer organization whose function is to promote car pools, vanpools and alternate commute modes. The coordinator shall have a permanent mailing address, daytime telephone and office convenient to the appropriate employment center.
   ENTERTAINMENT (Live): Any act, play, revue, pantomime, scene, dance act, or song and dance act, or any combination thereof, performed by one (1) or more persons whether or not they are compensated for the performance.
   ERECTED: The construction of any building or structure or the structural alteration of a building or structure, the result of which would be to change the exterior walls or roof, to increase the square foot floor area of the interior of the building or structure or to increase the height.
   EXTERIOR ARCHITECTURAL FEATURE: All of the outer surfaces of an improvement, building or structure, including, but not limited to, the kind, color and texture of the building materials and the type and style of all windows, doors, lights, signs and other fixtures appurtenant to such improvement, building or structure.
   EXTERIOR PERIMETER WALL HEIGHT: The existing exterior perimeter wall consisting of the framing members, from and including the foundation and any basement walls, to and including the uppermost floor and top plate of a building. Any portions of the exterior wall for any floor level that is horizontally offset are also included.
   FAMILY: An individual or two (2) or more persons living together as a single household in a dwelling unit.
   FAMILY CARE HOME, FOSTER HOME, OR GROUP HOME: Any residential facility, licensed by the State, providing twenty four (24) hour care for six (6) or fewer foster children, including children who have mental disorders or developmental or physical disabilities and who require special care and supervision as a result of their disabilities, and children who require nonmedical care in a structured environment that is owned, leased or rented and is the residence of the foster parent or parents, including their family, in whose care the foster children have been placed. Such services may be provided at least in part by staff employed by the licensee.
   FAST FOOD RESTAURANT: See definition of restaurant, fast food.
   FENCE, TEMPORARY CONSTRUCTION: "Temporary construction fence" means a fence not exceeding six feet in height, as measured from the adjacent existing grade, which is erected around a portion of a lot or parcel, or around the perimeter of a lot or parcel, to secure said lot or parcel during construction activity.
   FITNESS CENTER (Also Known As A FITNESS CLUB, HEALTH CLUB And Commonly Referred To As A GYM): A place which houses exercise equipment for the purpose of physical exercise.
   FLAG: Any fabric, banner, or bunting containing distinctive colors, patterns, or symbols, used as a symbol of government, political subdivision, or other entity used as a signalizing device and usually displayed hanging free from a staff or halyard to which it is attached by one edge.
   FLAT ROOF: A roof surface which slopes ten percent (10%) or less.
   FLOOR: The horizontal, base surface of a room.
   FLOOR AREA: The total horizontal area on all floors, stories or levels, as measured to the interior of a building's perimeter walls, including all floors, stories or levels of the primary dwelling, attached and detached accessory dwelling units, habitable attic space, and accessory buildings. See subsection 15-4A-6F of this title for additional details when calculating "floor area".
   FLOOR AREA (GROSS): The area included within the surrounding exterior walls of a building or portion thereof, exclusive of garages, vent shafts and courts. The floor area of a building, or portion thereof, not provided with surrounding exterior walls shall be the usable area under the horizontal projection of the roof or floor above.

 
   FLOOR AREA (NET): The total horizontal area of all floors, stories or levels, as measured to the interior of a building’s perimeter walls. Unless specified in otherwise individual zoning district, space devoted to the following shall not be included when determining the total net floor area within a building or structure:
   A.   Elevator shafts.
   B.   Stairwells and stairway enclosures.
   C.   Courts or atriums.
   D.   Rooms exclusively holding building operating equipment.
   E.   Parking spaces and parking structures.
   F.   That portion of any structure that is devoted exclusively to parking.
   G.   Restrooms and hallways in common areas of nonresidential buildings.
In the M-1 Zone only, the total space devoted to high or medium bay labs may be multiplied by a factor of 0.5 to determine the net floor area.
   FLOOR AREA RATIO: The floor area or net floor area of all buildings on a lot, divided by the lot area.
   FOOD TO GO: See definition of restaurant, food to go.
   FREEWAY: A highway in respect to which the owners of abutting lands have no right or easement of access to or from their abutting lands, or in respect to which such owners have only limited or restricted right or easement of access.
   FREIGHT FORWARDING: An establishment primarily engaged in undertaking the transportation of goods from shippers to receivers for a charge covering the entire transportation, and in turn, making use of the services of other transportation establishments as instrumentalities in effecting delivery.
   FULL SERVICE RESTAURANT: See definition of restaurant, full service.
   GOVERNMENT BUILDINGS/PUBLIC USES: Government buildings/public uses include, but are not limited to, City offices, police and fire stations, parking, post offices, libraries, and related buildings.
   GRADE: The elevation of the surface of the ground of a property.
   GRADE DIFFERENTIAL: The difference in ground elevation between the grade plane and the lowest point of the finished grade adjacent to the exterior walls of the building. A grade differential is exempt when measuring the height of a building or structure. Any portion below the grade plane which exceeds the maximum permitted grade differential for the zoning district is included in calculating the vertical height of the building. See section 15-2-3 of this title for exceptions to building height.
   GRADE, EXISTING: The surface of the ground or pavement at a stated location as it exists prior to disturbance in preparation for a project at the site.
   GRADE, FINISHED: The elevation after the land is cleared, cut, filled, graded, or construction improvements are completed, including but not limited to, pathways, pavements, hardscape or landscaping are complete.
   GRADE, NATURAL: The ground elevation which existed prior to excavation, cut, fill, or landscaping improvements. The Director may assist in establishing the existing natural grade, based on the surrounding undisturbed existing grade on other portions of the site, or based on adjacent properties to the site, or the level of the finished sidewalk.
   GRADE PLANE: Is a horizontal reference plane representing the average elevation between the highest and lowest point of the natural grade prior to excavation, fill or construction, measured immediately below or adjacent to the exterior perimeter walls of a building or structure.

 
   GREENHOUSE WINDOW: A window projecting out from a building wall, typically with glass on four (4) sides, which does not provide additional floor area.
   HABITABLE AREA: As defined by the California Building Code.
   HABITABLE VEHICLE: Any mobile home, camper, house trailer, travel trailer, recreational vehicle or any other vehicle utilized for human habitation, on a temporary or permanent basis. Habitable vehicle does not include those vehicles located in an authorized mobile home park.
   HARDSCAPE: Any durable material (pervious and nonpervious) that is comprised of solid manmade and natural materials used in the built environment such as: stone, tile, wood, crushed rock, gravel, granite, brick, metal, glass, bitumen, concrete, and masonry. Hardscape projects may include paved areas, walkways, patios, statuary, walls, pools, fountains, fireplaces, fire pits, stone benches, and architectural landscape features.
   HAZARDOUS WASTE MANAGEMENT FACILITIES (OFF SITE): Independent off site facilities used for, but not limited to, the transfer, storage, treatment, recycling or land disposal of hazardous waste which has been produced at a separate facility. Hazardous waste is any waste or combination of wastes, which because of its quantity, concentration, physical, chemical or infectious nature may exhibit one or more of the following characteristics: toxicity, corrosivity, flammability or reactivity.
   HEAVY MANUFACTURING: Those industrial activities involving the processing, handling and manufacturing of products and research and technological processes which are not compatible with uses allowed in other zones and largely contribute to nuisance factors, such as noise, vibration, glare, heat, dust, humidity, odor or any type of potential air or waste pollution and have a potential to be hazardous beyond the site's property lines.
   HELICOPTER LANDING FACILITY (HELISTOP): Any landing area used for landing or taking off of private helicopters for the purpose of picking up and discharging of passengers or cargo. No fueling, refueling or service facilities are permitted.
   HIGH AND MEDIUM BAY LABS: Any establishment, building or structure, or portion thereof, used for the assembly, packaging, fabrication, testing and processing of materials into large and bulky finished products, such as spacecraft. The process may also include the research and development and prototype production of a product. The interior of the building, or portion thereof used for high and medium bay labs, shall be a minimum of twenty feet (20') in height as measured from the floor to the lowest projection. The number of employees per square foot of net floor area shall not exceed one per one thousand (1,000).
   HIGH OCCUPANCY VEHICLE (HOV): A bus pool, car pool or vanpool vehicle used for employee commuting purposes.
   HIGH POINT OF NATURAL GRADE: Is the highest point of the natural grade adjacent to the exterior walls of a building, planned or built, where it is situated on a sloping lot.
   HISTORIC DISTRICT: Any geographically definable small or large area containing buildings, structures, sites and objects linked historically through location, design, setting, materials, workmanship, feeling, and/or association. The significance of a district is the product of the sense of time and place in history that individual components collectively convey. This significance may relate to developments during one period or through several periods in history.
   HISTORIC SITE: Any parcel or portion of real property which has special character or special historical, cultural, architectural, archaeological, community or aesthetic value.
   HOME OCCUPATION: The partial use of a dwelling unit for commercial or nonresidential uses by a resident thereof which is subordinate and incidental to the use of the dwelling for residential purposes, in compliance with all of the following conditions:
   A.   Not more than two hundred (200) square feet located in the dwelling shall be devoted to the home occupation;
   B.   There shall be no display of inventory, supplies, materials or merchandise on the premises;
   C.   No person shall be employed other than the immediate members of the family who reside on the premises;
   D.   No signs in connection with the home occupation, lighted or unlighted, shall be placed on the premises;
   E.   The home occupation shall not preempt the required off street parking spaces;
   F.   The home occupation shall not generate vehicular traffic not normally associated with residential uses;
   G.   No home occupation shall be permitted that creates noise, odor, dust, vibration, fumes, smoke, electrical interference or other objectionable conditions not normally associated with a residential occupancy; and
   H.   Notwithstanding the foregoing limitations on home occupations, until December 31, 1972, home occupations shall also include home occupations lawfully in existence on February 28, 1972, pursuant to definition of "certificate of occupancy" of this section as the same read on February 28, 1972.
   HOME SHARING: Renting, for a period of 30 consecutive days or less, of one or more bedrooms in a dwelling unit that is the primary residence of the host, while the host lives on site, in the dwelling unit, throughout the transient user’s stay.
   HOME SHARING UNIT: A dwelling unit that is made available for home sharing. A home sharing unit has historically been, and continues to be, included in the definition of “hotel” for purposes of Title 3, Chapter 4 of this Code.
   HOMELESS PERSON: Has the same definition set forth in 42 USC section 11302.
   HOSPITAL: An institution for the diagnosis, care, and treatment of human illness, which includes surgery, room, board and other services for the ill.
   HOTEL: Any building containing six (6) or more guestrooms intended or designed to be used, or which are used, rented or hired out to be occupied, or which are occupied for sleeping purposes by guests. Said use may also contain such ancillary facilities as conference facilities, personal services or food preparation and dispensing. Said definition shall also apply to a bed and breakfast operation.
   IMPROVEMENT: Any building, structure, place, fence, gate, landscaping, tree, wall, parking facility, work of art, or other object constituting a physical feature of real property, or any part of such feature.
   INTERMEDIATE CARE FACILITY/DEVELOPMENTALLY DISABLED; HABILITATIVE: A state licensed facility that provides twenty four (24) hour personal care, habilitation, developmental, and supportive health services to developmentally disabled persons who have intermittent recurring needs for nursing services, but have been certified by a physician and surgeon as not requiring availability of continuous skilled nursing care.
   INTERMEDIATE CARE FACILITY/DEVELOPMENTALLY DISABLED; NURSING: A state licensed facility that provides twenty four (24) hour personal care and nursing supervision for developmentally disabled persons who have intermittent recurring needs for skilled nursing care but have been certified by a physician and surgeon as not requiring availability of continuous skilled nursing care. The facility shall serve medically fragile persons who have developmental disabilities or demonstrate significant developmental delay that may lead to a developmental disability if not treated.
   INTERMODAL TRANSIT FACILITY: A facility which provides safe and convenient automobile, bus, van, bicycle, and pedestrian access to a metro rail station by providing, among other things, park and ride, kiss and ride, and van pool facilities, motorcycle and bicycle parking, special bus loading areas, and other passenger amenities such as transit information kiosks, telephones, and bicycle racks.
   JUNIOR ACCESSORY DWELLING UNIT: See "Accessory Dwelling Unit, Junior."
   KENNEL: A place where four (4) or more adult dogs or cats or any combination thereof, are kept, whether by owners of the dogs and cats or by persons providing facilities and care, whether or not for compensation. An adult dog or cat is one of either sex, altered, or unaltered, that has reached the age of four (4) months.
   KITCHEN: Any room or portion of a room within a building designated and/or used or intended to be used for the cooking or preparation of food, which may also include a sink, refrigeration, a garbage disposal, and storage.
   LATTICE: A structure of interwoven, crossed strips arranged to form a regular pattern of open spaces that is usually made of wood or metal.
   LIGHT ASSEMBLY AND PROCESSING: See definition of Light Industrial.
   LIGHT INDUSTRIAL: Light manufacturing, research and development, and office. "Light manufacturing" is defined as the assembly, packaging, fabrication, and processing of materials into finished products, rather than the conversion or extraction of raw materials.
   LIVE/WORK: The partial use of a dwelling unit for the following commercial uses: artists’ studios and workspace for artists and artisans, illustrators, painters, sculptors, photographers, or other activities related to fine arts (except musicians); and architectural, engineering, industrial design and drafting and other construction design activities.
   LIVES ON-SITE: Maintains a physical presence in the dwelling unit including, all of the following: the storing of one’s clothes and other personal effects, sleeping overnight, preparing and eating meals, and engaging in other activities of the type typically engaged in by a person residing in a dwelling unit.
   LODGING HOUSE: A dwelling containing a single dwelling unit and not more than five (5) guestrooms or suites of rooms, where lodging is provided with or without meals, for compensation for more than one week. Guestrooms numbering six (6) or greater shall be considered a hotel.
   LOT: A single legally created parcel, tract or area of land, which abuts a street.

 
   LOT AREA: The total horizontal area within the boundary lines of a lot.

 
   LOT, CORNER: A lot abutting on two (2) intersecting or intercepting streets, where the interior angle of intersection or interception does not exceed one hundred twenty eight degrees (128°).

 
   LOT COVERAGE:
   A.   A covered floor area included within and measured from the outside of the exterior walls of a building, including, but not limited to, dwelling units, lobby area, and elevators; and
   B.   An area not provided with surrounding exterior walls, if located under a roof or other covering, including, but not limited to, areas covered by stairways and walkways which provide ingress and egress. Private balconies and decks (not providing required ingress and egress) that are five feet (5') or less in width as measured from the exterior building wall shall not be included in computing lot coverage. Any portion of private balconies and decks that extends more than five feet (5') from the building wall shall be included in lot coverage.
   C.   Uncovered decks and patios, which are thirty inches (30") or more in height are also included in lot coverage.
   LOT DEPTH: The horizontal length of a straight line drawn from the midpoint of the lot front line and at right angles to such line, connecting with a line intersecting the midpoint of the lot rear line and parallel to the lot front line. In the case of a lot having a curved front line, the lot front line, for purposes of this section, shall be deemed to be a line tangent to the curve and parallel to a straight line connecting the points of intersection of the lot side lines of the lot with the lot front line.

 
   LOT, INTERIOR: A lot other than a corner lot or reversed corner lot.

 
   LOT LINE, FRONT: In the case of an interior lot, a line separating the lot from the street. In the case of a corner lot, the lot front line shall be the line separating the narrowest street frontage of the lot from the street.

 
   LOT LINE, REAR: A lot line which is opposite and most distant from the front lot line. For the purpose of establishing the lot rear line of a triangular or trapezoidal lot, or of a lot the rear line of which is formed by two (2) or more lines, the following shall apply:
   A.   For a triangular or gore-shaped lot, a line ten feet (10') in length within the lot and farthest removed from the lot front line and at right angles to the line comprising the depth of the lot shall be used as the lot rear line;
   B.   In the case of a trapezoidal lot, the rear line of which is not parallel to the lot front line, the lot rear line shall be deemed to be a line at right angles to the line comprising the depth of the lot and drawn through a point bisecting the recorded lot rear line; or,
   C.   In the case of a pentagonal lot, the rear boundary of which includes an angle formed by two (2) lines, the angles shall be employed for determining the lot rear line in the same manner as prescribed for a triangular lot.

 
   LOT LINE, SIDE: Any lot boundary line not a front lot line, a street side lot line, or a rear lot line.

 
   LOT LINE, STREET SIDE: The lot line which separates the lot from the street, but is not the front lot line.

 
   LOT, REVERSED CORNER: A corner lot in which the street side lot line is substantially a continuation of the front lot line of the lot upon which the rear of the reversed corner lot abuts.

 
   LOT, THROUGH: A lot having street frontage on two (2) parallel or approximately parallel streets. Such a lot shall be considered to have two (2) front yards. The depth of each yard shall be based upon the zoning district in which each front yard is located.

 
   LOT WIDTH: The horizontal distance between the side lot lines measured at right angles at the rear line of the required front yard.

 
   LOW BARRIER NAVIGATION CENTERS: A housing-first, low-barrier, service-enriched shelter focused on moving people into permanent housing that provides temporary living facilities while case managers connect individuals experiencing homelessness to income, public benefits, health services, shelter, and housing. For purposes of this definition, "low barrier" means the best practices to reduce barriers to entry, including, without limitation: allowing pets, permitting partners to share living space, and providing storage for residents' possessions. Low Barrier shelters are permitted in accordance with Article 15-37A of this code.
   LOW POINT OF NATURAL GRADE: Is the lowest point of the natural grade adjacent to the exterior walls of a building, planned or built, where it is situated on a sloping lot.
   MANUFACTURING: The manufacturing, compounding, processing, assembling, packaging or testing of goods or equipment.
   MINI-MART: A commercial establishment which sells food and beverages and is operated in conjunction with a service station.
   MOBILE HOME: A vehicle, other than a motor vehicle, greater than three hundred twenty (320) square feet in gross floor area designed with attached axles and wheels, which may be used for permanent or semipermanent housing or human occupancy, and which is designed to be drawn by a motor vehicle. The term shall also include any vehicle meeting the above description which is used for an office, a classroom, a laboratory, processing, manufacturing, retail sales or other use.
   MOBILE HOME PARK: A tract of land developed and operated as a unit with individual sites and facilities to accommodate two (2) or more mobile homes.
   MOTEL: Any building containing six (6) or more guestrooms intended or designated to be used, or which are used or rented or which are occupied for sleeping purposes by guests. Said use shall not contain such ancillary facilities for conferences, personal services, food preparation and dispensing.
   MOVIE AND ENTERTAINMENT FACILITIES: An outdoor or indoor area, building, part of a building, structure, or defined area which is utilized primarily for the public presentation of film, television, music video, multimedia, or other related activities that in the opinion of the Director of Community Development are similar when developed in combination with multimedia production facilities.
Facilities may include as an accessory use retail sales, recreational activities, ancillary offices, and other uses customary and necessary to a movie and/or entertainment facility.
   MULTIMEDIA: A combination of film, television, music, music video, world wide web, or other related activities that in the opinion of the Director of Community Development are similar.
   MULTIMEDIA ARCHIVE FACILITIES: A building, part of a building, or structure, which is utilized primarily for the storage of media related documents, equipment, records and/or historical artifacts related to the entertainment industry.
   MURAL: A sign consisting of a picture, painting, or other artwork applied to and made integral with an exterior wall surface of a building, structure, fence, or garden wall.
   MUSEUM: A land use involving the collection, documentation, preservation, exhibition, interpretation and public display of objects of historical, scientific, cultural, or artistic interest for the public benefit. A museum may include ancillary offices, a library, multimedia presentation rooms and storage rooms. Museums may also include accessory uses such as retail sales, restaurants, cafes, recreational uses, and other ancillary uses customarily associated with museums.
   OFFICE, MEDICAL-DENTAL: A building or group of buildings designed for the use of, and occupied and used by, physicians, chiropractors, acupuncturists, physical therapists, and dentists and others engaged professionally in such healing arts for human beings as are recognized by the laws of the State, including such accessory uses as the installation and use of therapeutic equipment, X-ray equipment or laboratories, chemical, biochemical, and biological laboratories used as direct accessories to the medical-dental professions; dental laboratories including facilities for the making of dentures on prescription; and pharmacies limited to the retail dispensing of pharmaceuticals and sickroom supplies (but not room or orthopedic equipment); provided there shall be no exterior display windows or signs pertaining to such accessory uses other than a directory sign.
   OFFICES, GENERAL: Offices maintained and used as a place of business conducted by persons whose business activity consists principally of services to the person as distinguished from the handling of commodities. This does not include medical-dental offices. General offices include, but are not limited to, the following:
   A.   Administrative/Business: Establishments providing direct services to consumers, such as credit, lending, and trust agencies, data processing services, detective agencies, employment, insurance agencies, real estate offices, stenographic, secretarial and word processing services, government offices and educational institution offices, union offices and utility company offices.
   B.   Broadcasting Offices And Studios: Commercial and public communications uses, including radio and television broadcasting and receiving stations and studios, with facilities entirely within buildings.
   C.   Production: Office type facilities occupied by businesses engaged in the production of intellectual property. Production uses include computer software production and programming services, media postproduction services, graphic design, fashion, photography and commercial art studios, writers' and artists' offices.
   D.   Professional: Professional offices include accounting; advertising agencies; architectural, engineering, planning and surveying services; attorneys; auditing and bookkeeping services; consulting; corporate; counseling services; court reporting services; educational services; literary and talent agencies; management and public relations services; scientific and research organizations.
   OFFICES, MULTIMEDIA RELATED: A building, part of a building, structure, or defined area which is utilized primarily for the office space directly related to film, television, music video, multimedia, or other related activities.
   OUTDOOR ADVERTISING DISPLAY: Any card, paper, cloth, metal, glass, wooden, or other display or device of any kind or character whatsoever placed for outdoor advertising purposes on the ground or on any tree, wall, rock, structure, or thing whatsoever.
   OUTDOOR ADVERTISING STRUCTURE: A structure of any kind or character erected or maintained for outdoor advertising purposes, upon which any outdoor advertising display may be placed.
   PARKING DEMAND STUDY: An analysis of the total number of parking spaces required in order to accommodate the maximum number of vehicles for parking purposes by a particular use or site at any given time. The analysis shall consider parking required for all employees, occupants, clients, and visitors.
   PENNANT: Any lightweight plastic, fabric, or other material, whether or not containing a message of any kind, suspended from a rope, wire, or string, usually in series, designed to move in the wind.
   PERGOLA: A structure of parallel colonnades supporting an open roof of beams and crossing rafters or trelliswork, over which climbing plants are trained to grow.
   PICTURE EQUIPMENT SALES: An outdoor or indoor area, building, part of a building, structure, or a defined area which is utilized primarily for the sales, lease, storage and/or rental of equipment and materials utilized in film, television, music video, multimedia, or other action activities that in the opinion of the Director of Community Development are similar.
   PLAYHOUSE: A structure to be used, or intended to be used, by children for play purposes.
   PORCH (Sometimes Referred To As A VERANDA): An exterior appendage to a building forming a covered approach or vestibule to a doorway. The covering may have a separate roof from the building, and may have railings and/or supporting columns.
   PORTE-COCHERE: A porch roof projecting over a driveway at or adjacent to the entrance to a building that shelters those getting in and out of vehicles.
   POSTPRODUCTION FACILITIES: An outdoor or indoor area, building, part of a building, structure, or defined area, which is utilized primarily for support activities necessary and incidental to the multimedia industry subsequent to production actions.
   PREFERENTIAL PARKING: Parking spaces designated or assigned, through use of a sign or painted space markings, for car pool and vanpool vehicles which are provided at a reduced cost and/or are in locations considered to be the best or most desirable, such as adjacent to a building entrance or within a covered or shaded area, if such is not provided for single occupant vehicles.
   PRESERVATION: The identification, study, protection, restoration, rehabilitation, or acquisition of cultural resources.
   PRIVATE RESIDENCE: A house, an apartment unit, a mobile home, or other similar habitable dwelling.
   PROJECT COST: The total value of a project, excluding the land value, as determined by the Building Official of the City, and indicated on the building permit that is issued by the City for that project.
   PROPERTY OWNER: The person or persons shown as the record owner of the property on the latest available assessment roll of the County of Los Angeles. For the purposes of chapter 16 of this title, "property owner" shall mean the legal owner of a development who serves as the lessor to a tenant and/or agent. The property owner shall be responsible for complying with the provisions of chapter 16 of this title, either directly or by delegating such responsibility as appropriate to a tenant and/or agent.
   PUBLIC PLACE: Any exterior area on public or private property, which is visible to the general public as described in section 15-34-15.
   PUBLIC WORKS PROJECT: Any action undertaken by the City or under contract to the City to construct, alter, repair, or maintain any City structure, utility, or right-of-way.
   RECREATIONAL FACILITIES:
   A.   Public: Public recreational facilities are facilities that are operated by a government agency.
      1.   Indoor: Examples include, without limitation, indoor entertainment, multipurpose recreational buildings, and studios for dance, art, music, photography, and martial arts.
      2.   Outdoor: Examples include, without limitation, athletic fields, ballparks and bleachers, basketball, racquetball, tennis, and volleyball courts, golf courses, parks and other areas of active or passive recreational usage, swimming pools, trails and bicycle trails.
   B.   Private/Commercial:
      1.   Indoor: Examples include, without limitation, arcades, billiard/pool halls, bowling alleys, indoor entertainment, racquetball and tennis courts, and skating rinks.
      2.   Outdoor: Examples include, without limitation, amusement centers (arcades, skating rinks, miniature golf, and similar uses), golf courses, miniature golf, racquetball and tennis courts.
   RECREATIONAL VEHICLE: A vehicular unit, other than a mobile home, whose gross floor area is less than three hundred twenty (320) square feet, which is designed as a temporary dwelling for travel, recreational, and vacation use, and which is either self- propelled, mounted on, or pulled by another vehicle. Examples include, but are not limited to, a travel trailer, camping trailer, truck camper, motor home, fifth wheel trailer, or van.
   RELOCATION: Any change of the location of a building or structure from its present setting to another setting.
   RESEARCH AND DEVELOPMENT: A process of experimentation, whereby a physical product, such as a biological, chemical, electrical, magnetic, mechanical and/or optical component is designed, manufactured, tested, and refined. This process does not include uses/activities that do not lead to the development of a physical product, such as computer modeling, computer software development, soils and other materials testing laboratories, or medical laboratories. This process does not include the general or mass production of the product.
   RESIDENTIAL CARE FACILITY: A residential care facility (State authorized, certified or licensed) provides twenty-four (24) hour residential care for children, elderly persons, people with physical or mental disabilities, or incompetent persons in need of personal services, protection, supervision, assistance, guidance, or training essential for sustaining the activities of daily living or for the protection of the individual. This classification includes, but is not limited to, intermediate care facilities, developmentally disabled habilitative or nursing, congregate living health facilities, and other facilities licensed by the State of California.
   RESIDENTIAL CARE FACILITY FOR THE ELDERLY: Pursuant to California Health and Safety Code § 1569.2, “resident care facility for the elderly” means a housing arrangement chosen voluntarily by persons 60 years of age or over, or their authorized representative, where varying levels and intensities of care and supervision, protective supervision, personal care, or health-related services are provided, based upon their varying needs, as determined in order to be admitted and to remain in the facility.
   RESIDENTIAL FACILITY: Any family home, group care facility, or similar facility, licensed by the State, for twenty four (24) hour nonmedical care of persons in need of personal services, supervision, or assistance essential for sustaining the activities of daily living or for the protection of the individual.
   REST HOME, CONVALESCENT HOME OR NURSING HOME: A facility serving seven (7) or more persons in which nursing, dietary and/or other personal services are furnished twenty four (24) hours a day to convalescents, invalids, and aged persons, but in which are kept no persons suffering from a mental sickness, disease, disorder, ailment, or from a contagious or communicable disease, and in which are performed no surgery, maternity, or other primary treatments such as are customarily provided in sanatoriums or hospitals, or in which no persons are kept or served who normally would be admittable to a mental hospital.
   RESTAURANT: Any business establishment, building, or structure where food or drink are prepared and served for consumption either on or off the premises, which may also include as accessory uses, service to persons over an interior counter, outside the structure, or from an outdoor service window. Any restaurant with an automobile service window shall be considered a drive-through restaurant.
   RESTAURANT, CAFE: An establishment that sells food or beverages for consumption on or off the premises in conjunction with retail sales of other goods. A cafe can only be located within a multiuse shopping center, office development, or the commercial portion of a mixed use development in a multi-tenant structure. Alternatively, a cafe can exist as an accessory use within a primary permitted use. A cafe must comply with the following:
   A.   A cafe can only have a limited food and beverage menu. Food sold at cafes must be generally received by customers in a prepackaged or precooked state that requires little or no preparation. Limited means for heating food (such as a microwave oven or toaster oven) are allowed;
   B.   Cafes cannot exceed one thousand two hundred (1,200) gross square feet (including the area for food consumption);
   C.   The interior area for food consumption in cafes must be a maximum of four hundred (400) gross square feet of the floor area of the primary permitted on site use;
   D.   Seating areas in cafes must be clearly separated from other portions of the use as defined by fixed barriers such as full or partial walls, fencing, planters, corridors, counters, or permanent display fixtures;
   E.   Not more than fifteen (15) seats are allowed within cafes;
   F.   Orders for food or beverages in cafes must be placed and picked up from an interior counter only. No table service is provided;
   G.   No drive-through window or outdoor service window is allowed;
   H.   No alcoholic beverages can be served; and
   I.   A minimum of five percent (5%) of the gross floor area must be devoted to the sale of nonfood products.
   RESTAURANT, DRIVE-THROUGH: Any business establishment, building, or structure where food or drink are prepared and served for consumption either on or off the premises by order from or service to persons at an automobile service window, and which may also include as accessory uses, service to persons over an interior counter, outside the structure, or from an outdoor service window.
   RESTAURANT, FAST FOOD: A restaurant where customers purchase food and beverages and either consume the food and beverages on the premises within a short period of time or take the food and beverages off the premises. Typical characteristics of a fast food restaurant include, without limitation, the purchase of food and beverages at a walk-up window or counter; no table service by a server; payment for food and beverages before consumption; and the packaging of food and beverages in disposable containers. A restaurant is not to be considered a fast food or takeout restaurant solely on the basis of incidental or occasional takeout sales.
   RESTAURANT, FOOD TO GO: A restaurant or other such establishment designed as a takeout facility in which no food is consumed on the premises and no provisions are made for that purpose. Provisions for deliveries, catering, drive-through or walk-up facilities are permitted. Food to go uses must meet the parking requirements for retail uses.
   RESTAURANT, FULL SERVICE: A restaurant where customers purchase food and beverages and consume the food and beverages on the premises. Typical characteristics of a full service restaurant, include, without limitation, table service by a server; payment for food and beverages after consumption; and serving food and beverages in nondisposable containers. A full service restaurant may include incidental or occasional takeout sales.
   RESTORATION: The act or process of accurately returning the form and details of a property and its setting as it appeared at a particular period of time, the removal of later work, or the replacement of missing earlier work.
   RIDESHARING: The cooperative effort of two (2) or more people traveling together, usually to and from work. Car pools, vanpools, bus pools, and taxi pools are all methods of ridesharing.
   ROOF: A structural covering over any portion of a building or structure including the projections beyond the walls or supports of the building or structure. An open work covering shall not be considered a roof if the upper horizontal surface area of the component solid portions thereof do not exceed twenty percent (20%) of the area of the covering.
   ROTUNDA: A round, domed feature, building or portion thereof containing high interior vertical space between the floor and ceiling above.
   SCHOOLS, ELEMENTARY, JUNIOR HIGH AND HIGH: Institutions of learning which offer instruction in the several branches of learning and study required to be taught in the public schools by the Education Code of the State.
   SCHOOLS, PRIVATE: Private schools are educational institutions that include, without limitation, adult level, business, vocational, and trade schools; boarding schools; colleges and universities; private preschools, elementary schools, middle or junior high schools, and high schools; military academies; professional schools (law, medicine, etc.), seminaries/religious ministry training facilities. Private schools also include specialized nondegree granting schools offering instruction in: art, ballet and other dance, computers and electronics, cooking, drama, driver education, language, and music.
   SEGMENTED GRADE PLANE: Is multiple horizontal grade planes adjacent to different portions of the exterior walls of a single building. Segmented grade planes are used for measuring the height of structures on sites with a significant natural grade slope.

 
   SENIOR CITIZEN HOUSING: A multiple-family development which is restricted to individuals fifty five (55) years of age or older, and which provides common facilities, including, but not limited to, kitchen, dining room, game playing area, library, and restrooms.
   SERVICE STATION: An area which provides for the sale of gasoline, other fuels and lubricants for motor vehicles, and the fueling of motor vehicles as the primary use. Accessory services may also be provided, such as retail minimarts, tube and tire repairs, battery charging, storage and sale of merchandise and supplies related to the servicing of motor vehicles, motor vehicle washing, grease racks, and other minor motor vehicle repairs, excluding body and fender work, engine overhauling and replacement, transmission work, and other similar activities.
   SETBACK: The minimum required distance between the interior lot line or the edge of public right-of-way and the building line.
   SHARED MOBILITY DEVICE (SMD): Any transportation device by which a person can be propelled, moved or drawn, that is displayed, offered or placed for rent in any Public Area, Public Right-of-Way, or Private Property. This includes Shared Bicycles, Shared Electric Assist Bicycles (Shared E-Assist Bikes), Shared Electric Scooters, and similar devices as determined by the City. This definition excludes car share vehicles, taxicabs, and similar motor vehicles.
   SHORT-TERM RENTAL: The rental of any portion of any structure for occupancy, dwelling, lodging or sleeping purposes for a period of 30 consecutive calendar days or less.
   SIGN: Any structure, device, or material, temporary or permanent, fixed or portable, moving or stationary, whether located inside or outside a building, that is visible from any property where the primary purpose of the sign is to convey visual communication. "Sign" does not include the following:
   A.   Interior signs that are located entirely within an enclosed structure and not visible from the exterior;
   B.   Building features that are only decorative or architectural and do not include trademarks. Such building features may include minimal lettering or moving parts.
   C.   Symbols of noncommercial organizations or concepts including, without limitation, religious or political symbols when they are permanently integrated into the structure of a building;
   D.   Items or devices of personal apparel, decoration or appearance including, without limitation, tattoos or makeup;
   E.   Marks on tangible products that identify the maker, seller, provider or product, and that customarily remain attached to the product even after completion of a sale;
   F.   Traffic, directional, emergency, warning or informational signs required or authorized by a government agency having jurisdiction;
   G.   Public utility signs;
   H.   Advertisements or banners mounted on duly licensed mass transit vehicles including, without limitation, buses and trains, that legally pass through the City;
   I.   Insignia located on legal vehicles and watercraft including, without limitation, license plates, registration insignia, noncommercial messages, messages relating to the business for which the vehicle is an instrument or tool, and messages relating to the proposed sale, lease or exchange of vehicles or watercraft;
   J.   Building marker signs; and
   K.   Newsracks and newsstands.

 
   SIGN, ABANDONED: Any sign which was lawfully erected, but whose use has ceased or whose structure has been abandoned for a period of one year. A lawfully erected sign structure for a vacant property or building which is actively available for lease is not abandoned unless the Director of Communit y Development determines the sign is a public nuisance, pursuant to section 15-18-8 of this title.
   SIGN, ANIMATED: A sign with action or motion, flashing, or color changes, accomplished through manual, electronic, or other means, but not including, wind actuated elements such as flags, banners, or specialty items, and public service signs such as time and temperature units.
   SIGN, ANNOUNCEMENT: A temporary sign intended to direct attention to, or advertise a future development, tenant, or business on a property.
   SIGN AREA: The face or display area of a sign, including its border only when the border carries or displays part of the message or copy. Supports or uprights on which such sign is placed are excluded from the sign area calculation. For signs using individual channel letters, the sign area is determined by not more than two (2) rectangles, of at least six inch (6") width, drawn around the entire grouping of letters or words.
   SIGN, BANNER: Any sign of lightweight fabric or similar flexible material that is permanently mounted to a pole or a building by a permanent frame at one or more edges. National flags, State or Municipal flags, "POW/MIA" flags, or the official flag of any institution or business shall not be considered banners.
   SIGN, BEACON: Any light with one or more beams directed into the atmosphere or directed at one or more points not on the same zone lot as the light source. The light source may be fixed, rotate, or give the appearance of movement.
   SIGN, BILLBOARD: Any sign erected for the purpose of advertising a product, event, business, person, or subject not located on the premises on which the sign is located and containing a surface or display area of fifty (50) square feet or more.
   SIGN, BUILDING: Any sign attached to any part of a building, as contrasted to a freestanding sign.
   SIGN, BUILDING MARKER: Any sign indicating the name of a building and/or date of construction, which sign is cut into a masonry surface or made of bronze or other permanent material.
   SIGN, CANOPY OR AWNING: Any sign that is a part of or attached to an awning, canopy, or other fabric, plastic, or structural protective cover over a door, entrance, window, or outdoor service area. A marquee is not a canopy.
   SIGN, CHANGEABLE COPY: A sign, or part of a sign, that includes copy that can be changed through manual or electronic means, regardless of method of attachment or materials of construction.
   SIGN, COPY: That portion of a sign which contains the letters, words, numbers, pictures, or logos that convey a message to the viewer.
   SIGN, DIRECTIONAL: A sign that guides or directs pedestrian or vehicular traffic.
   SIGN, DIRECTORY: A sign listing the tenants or occupants and their locations throughout building or development.
   SIGN, ELECTRONIC MESSAGE CENTERS (EMCs): An outdoor sign that displays words, symbols, figures, or images that can be electronically or mechanically changed by remote or automated means.
   SIGN, FIN: A sign which is supported wholly by a one-story building of an open air business or by poles placed in the ground or partly by such a pole or poles and partly by a building or structure.
   SIGN, FREESTANDING: A sign that is part of a structure that is not attached to a building but is supported from the ground by one or more poles or posts with or without braces and is permanently mounted in a fixed location.
   SIGN, IDENTIFICATION: A sign with copy that identifies only the business name, product, or service sold, and/or street address of the building upon which it is placed.
   SIGN, INFORMATION: A sign that informs people of the purpose of an object or gives them instruction on the use of something (an example is "air/water", the location of restrooms or similar information) but does not contain advertising, brand, trade, or center name information.
   SIGN, LIGHT EMITTING DIODE OR LED: A sign incorporating light emitting diodes (LED) to display changeable copy. Signs that utilize LEDs for decorative, artistic or accent purposes, or as the primary source of illumination behind translucent elements are not included in this definition.
   SIGN, MARQUEE: A permanent roofed structure attached to and supported by the building and projecting over a public property.
   SIGN, MONUMENT OR GROUND: A sign with a solid base that is not attached to a building, where the bottom of the sign is in contact with or close to the ground.
   SIGN, NONCONFORMING: A sign which complied with all applicable regulations at the time it was installed, but which now is in conflict with the provisions of this title.
   SIGN, POLE: A freestanding sign that is supported by a pole/post or poles/posts.
   SIGN, POLITICAL: A temporary freestanding sign with noncommercial copy erected for an upcoming election.
   SIGN, PORTABLE: Any sign not permanently attached to the ground or permanent structure, or a sign designed to be transported, including, but not limited to, signs designed to be transported by means of wheels; signs converted to A- or T-frames; menu and sandwich board signs; balloons used as signs; and signs attached to or painted on vehicles parked and visible from the public right-of-way, unless said vehicle is used in the normal day to day operations of the business, or is a public transit vehicle designed to carry nineteen (19) or more passengers.
   SIGN, PROJECTING: Any sign affixed to a building or wall in such a manner that its leading edge extends more than six inches (6") beyond the surface of such building or wall. Marquee signs are included in this definition.
   SIGN, ROOF: Any sign erected and constructed wholly on and over the roof or parapet of a building, supported by the roof structure, and extending vertically above the roof. Signs that are attached to or painted upon a structure attached to the roof of a building are included in this definition.
   SIGN, TEMPORARY: Any sign, banner, pendant, valance, or advertising display constructed of cloth, canvas, light fabric, cardboard, wallboard, or other light materials, with or without frames, intended to be displayed for a limited period of time only.
   SIGN, WALL: Any sign attached parallel to, but within six inches (6") of a wall, painted on the wall surface of, or erected and confined within the limits of, an outside wall of any building or structure, which is supported by such wall or building, and which displays only one sign surface.
   SIGN, WINDOW: Any sign that is placed within three feet (3') of the inside of a window or upon the window panes or glass and is visible from the exterior of the window.
   SOFTSCAPE: Trees, shrubs, flowers, live horticulture plants, vines, ground covers, grasses, shrubs, trees, and may include high quality artificial plants and durable synthetic grass or artificial turf which are not made with heavy metals or lead with completely pervious backing.
   SOLAR ACCESS: The access of a solar energy system to direct sunlight.
   SOLAR COLLECTOR: A device, structure or a part of a device or structure for which the primary purpose is to transform solar radiant energy into thermal, mechanical, chemical, or electrical energy.
   SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEM: A device or structural design feature, a substantial purpose of which is to provide daylight for interior lighting or provide for the collection, storage and distribution of solar energy for space heating or cooling, electricity generation, or water heating.
   SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEM, ACTIVE: A solar energy system whose primary purpose is to harvest energy by transforming solar energy into another form of energy or transferring heat from a collector to another medium using mechanical, electrical, or chemical means.
   SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEM, GRID-INTERTIE: A photovoltaic system that is connected to an electric circuit served by an electric utility.
   SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEM, GROUND-MOUNTED: An Active Solar Energy System that is structurally mounted to the ground and is not roof-mounted; may be of any size (small-, medium- or large-scale).
   SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEM, LARGE-SCALE: An Active Solar Energy System that occupies more than 40,000 square feet of surface area (equivalent to a rated nameplate capacity of about 250kW DC or greater).
   SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEM, MEDIUM-SCALE: An Active Solar Energy System that occupies more than 1,750 but less than 40,000 square feet of surface area (equivalent to a rated nameplate capacity of about 10 - 250 kW DC).
   SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEM, OFF-GRID: A photovoltaic solar energy system in which the circuits energized by the solar energy system are not electrically connected in any way to electric circuits that are served by an electric utility.
   SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEM, PASSIVE: A solar energy system that captures solar light or heat without transforming it to another form of energy or transferring the energy via a heat exchanger.
   SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEM, ROOF-MOUNTED: An Active Solar Energy System that is structurally mounted to the roof of a building or structure; may be of any size (small-, medium- or large-scale).
   SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEM, SMALL-SCALE: An Active Solar Energy System that occupies 1,750 square feet of surface area or less (equivalent to a rated nameplate capacity of about 10 kW DC or less).
   SOLAR THERMAL SYSTEM: An Active Solar Energy System that uses collectors to convert the sun's rays into useful forms of energy for water heating, space heating, or space cooling.
   SOUTH COAST AIR QUALITY MANAGEMENT DISTRICT (SCAQMD): The regional authority appointed by the California State Legislature to meet Federal standards and otherwise improve air quality in the South Coast Air Basin (the nondesert portions of Los Angeles, Orange, Riverside, and San Bernardino Counties).
   SPACE: The location of automobile parking spaces and other accessory uses enumerated herein.
   SPECIAL EFFECTS STUDIOS: Space in an outdoor or indoor area, building, part of a building, structure, or a defined area, which is utilized primarily for the creation of special effects for film, television, music video, multimedia, or other related activities.
   STOOP: A raised platform that is approached by steps at the entrance to a building. A stoop may have a roof projecting out from the building wall over the building entrance that does not have any columns supporting it.
   STORE FRONT: The facade or entryway of a retail store which faces the street and is located on the ground floor or street level of a commercial building.
   STORY: That portion of building included between the surface of any floor and the surface of the next floor above it; or, if there is no floor above, then the space between such floor and the ceiling above. If the finished floor level directly above a usable or unused underfloor space is more than six feet (6') above "grade" as defined herein for more than fifty percent (50%) of the total perimeter, or is more than twelve feet (12') above "grade" as defined herein at any point, such usable or unused underfloor space shall be considered a "story".

 
   STORY, FIRST: The lowest story in a building which qualifies as a "story", as defined herein. In a building having only one floor level, said floor level shall be classified as the first story.
   STREET: Any thoroughfare or public way which exceeds twenty feet (20') in width and which has been or may be dedicated or deeded to the public for public use.
   STREET LINE: The boundary line between a street and the abutting property.
   STREET, SIDE: A street which is adjacent to a corner lot which extends in the general direction of the line determining the depth of the lot.
   STROBE LIGHT: A lighting device that uses a flashtube for high speed illumination.
   STRUCTURAL ALTERATIONS: Any change in the supporting members of a building such as foundations, bearing walls, columns, beams, floor or roof joists, girders or rafters, or changes in the exterior dimensions of the building.
   STRUCTURE: That which is built or constructed, an edifice or building of any kind, or any piece of work artificially built up or composed of parts jointed together in some definite manner.
   STUDIO/SOUND STAGES AND SUPPORT FACILITIES: Space in an outdoor or indoor area, building, part of a building, structure, or a defined area, which is utilized primarily for the creation of film, television, music video, multimedia, or other related activities.
   SUPPORTIVE HOUSING: Housing with no limit on length of stay, that is occupied by the target population, and that is linked to an onsite or offsite service that assists the supportive housing resident in retaining the housing, improving his or her health status, and maximizing his or her ability to live and, when possible, work in the community. Supportive housing shall be considered a residential use of property. Supportive housing can take the form of single-family or multi-family units and shall be subject only to those restrictions that apply to other residential dwellings of the same type in the same zone.
   SYNTHETIC GRASS (Also Referred To As ARTIFICIAL TURF): A surface of synthetic fibers made to look like natural grass.
   TARGET POPULATION: Persons with low incomes who have one or more disabilities, including mental illness, HIV or AIDS, substance abuse, or other chronic health condition, or individuals eligible for services provided pursuant to the Lanterman Developmental Disabilities Services Act (Welfare and Institutions Code § 4500, et seq.) and may include, among other populations, adults, emancipated minors, families with children, elderly persons, young adults aging out of the foster care system, individuals exiting from institutional settings, veterans, and homeless people.
   TENANT: The lessee or sublessee of a facility space within a development project.
   THEATER: A place where plays, operas, motion pictures, or similar activities sanctioned by law or custom are viewed by members of the public.
   THEATER AND PERFORMANCE SPACE: An outdoor or indoor area, building, part of a building, structure, or defined area, which is utilized primarily for rehearsal or research and development related to the presentation of film, television, music video, multimedia, or other related activities that in the opinion of the Director of Community Development are similar. Such areas may or may not be open to the general public.
   TOP OF BUILDING: Is the highest point of a pitched roof or the parapet on a building.
   TOWER: A building or structure, usually round or square in plan and characteristically taller than its diameter, forming a part of a larger building and is often located at a corner of the building.
   TRANSIT: Transportation service operated by a public or private agency for use by the general public that utilizes buses or railcars, following a fixed route and schedule.
   TRANSIT SUPPORT FACILITIES: Facilities, including, but not limited to, transit shelters, bus transfer centers, bus bays, park and ride lots, and/or transit operating or fare subsidies to employees.
   TRANSITIONAL HOUSING: Buildings configured as rental housing developments but operated under program requirements that require the termination of assistance and recirculating of the assisted unit to another eligible program recipient at a predetermined future point in time that shall be no less than six (6) months from the beginning of the assistance. Transitional housing shall be considered a residential use of property. Transitional housing can take the form of single-family or multi-family units and shall be subject only to those restrictions that apply to other residential dwellings of the same type in the same zone.
   TRANSPORTATION DEMAND MANAGEMENT (TDM): The alteration of travel behavior usually on the part of commuters through programs of incentives, services, and policies. TDM addresses alternatives to single occupant vehicles such as car pooling and van pooling, and changes in work schedules that move trips out of the peak period or eliminate them altogether (as is the case in telecommuting or compressed workweeks).
   TRELLIS (Also Referred To As A PERGOLA): A system of horizontal latticework supported on posts, designed to support growing vines and plants, or to provide partial shade for outdoor gathering/activity areas.
   TRIP REDUCTION: Reduction in the number of work related trips made by single occupant vehicles.
   TURRET: A small, slender ornamental tower that begins above ground level that usually projects from a corner of the building to which it is attached.
   UNDERGROUND PARKING FACILITIES: A basement equipped, designed, used, or intended to be used, for parking automobiles.
   USE: The activity occurring on a lot or parcel for which land or a building is arranged, designed or intended, or for which land or a building is or may be occupied, including all accessory uses.
   VACANCY: A building or structure that is unoccupied by a use, business, or individual, except that buildings which are actively available for lease or occupancy, or are being remodeled, shall not be considered vacant.
   VANPOOL: A vehicle carrying seven (7) or more persons commuting together to and from work on a regular basis, usually in a van or similar motor vehicle with a seating arrangement designed to carry seven (7) to fifteen (15) adult passengers, and on a prepaid subscription basis. Vanpools can be formed using private vans, company owned vans, or third party vans.
   VEHICLE: Any motorized form of transportation, including, but not limited to, automobiles, vans, buses, and motorcycles.
   VEHICLE LIFT: A stationary mechanical device with four (4) permanently anchored posts that vertically lifts a vehicle to allow the storage of a second vehicle below and must be designed with an automatic locking mechanism for safety.
   VEHICLE SALES AND SERVICES: The sales, rental, repair, alteration, restoration, towing, painting, or finishing of automobiles, trucks, recreational vehicles, boats, and other vehicles as a primary use, including the incidental wholesale and retail sale of vehicle parts as an accessory use. This includes, without limitation, the following categories:
      Accessories Installation: Minor facilities that specialize in the addition of supplemental convenience items or devices to vehicles that do not involve the primary operating system of a vehicle (such as motors or transmissions) or structural features (such as body, chassis, or suspension). For example, these establishments provide installation of alarms, stereos, and window tinting.
      Accessory Retail Sales And Services: Includes retail sales and services, storage of tires, car parts and other automobile supplies, and limited automobile sales. Automobile sales cannot exceed eight (8) automobiles per month; not more than three (3) automobiles can be displayed at one time.
      Car Washes: Permanent, self-service and/or attended car washing establishments, including fully mechanized facilities. May include detailing services.
      Impounding/Storage: Facilities that provide impounding and storage of towed or impounded vehicles. Does not include towing (see definition of Vehicle Sales And Services: Towing).
      Maintenance/Repair: The installation, replacement, tuning, or maintenance of the various parts, equipment, or operating systems of a vehicle, which includes body and fender work, engine overhauling and replacement, transmission work, automobile painting, and car washing.
      Mobile Home And Recreational Vehicle Sales: Retail establishments selling and/or renting the following new or used vehicles and products: boats, campers/camper shells, golf carts, jet skis, mobile homes, motor homes, motorcycles, snowmobiles, travel/recreational trailers, and other recreational vehicles.
      Service Stations: See definition of Service Station.
      Towing: Facilities that provide vehicle towing. Does not include storage of towed or impounded vehicles (see definition of Vehicle Sales And Services: Impounding/Storage).
      Vehicle Parts Sales: Stores that sell new automobile parts, tires, and accessories. May also include minor parts installation. The term does not include businesses dealing exclusively in used parts.
      Vehicle Sales/Rental: Retail establishments selling or renting automobiles, trucks and vans. May also include repair shops and the sales of parts and accessories, incidental to vehicle dealerships. The term does not include the sale of auto parts/accessories separate from a vehicle dealership (see definition of Vehicle Sales And Services: Vehicle Parts Sales); bicycle and moped sales (see definition of Commercial: Retail Sales: General Retail Stores); tire recapping establishments; or "service stations", which are separately defined.
   VEHICULAR USE AREA: The paved area of a parcel used for parking spaces, loading areas, driveways, and any other areas generally accessible by vehicles.
   VERANDA: A porch, usually roofed and partly enclosed by a railing, which extends across the front and sides of a house.
   VISIBLE AND ACCESSIBLE: As pertaining to artworks, means freely accessible to the public for viewing at least eight (8) hours each day of at least five (5) days per week.
   WAREHOUSING AND DISTRIBUTION: A building or premises in which goods, merchandise, or equipment are stored for eventual distribution.
   WASTE: The remains from either a manufacturing or assembly process, a finished product or a product which is no longer useful in its present form and may or may not be recycled for future use.
   WEB AUTHOR: An individual or group whose primary focus relates to the preparation of or assistance in the preparation of world wide web (www) related materials, including, but not limited to, www pages, advertisements, connections, or other related activities that in the opinion of the director of community development are similar.
   WORK: Any alteration, construction, demolition, relocation, or restoration of a designated cultural resource.
   XERISCAPING (Often Incorrectly Spelled ZERO-SCAPING Or XEROSCAPING): Landscaping and gardening that reduces or eliminates the need for supplemental water from irrigation. It is promoted in regions that do not have easily accessible, plentiful, or reliable supplies of fresh water, and is gaining acceptance in other areas as access to water becomes more limited. Xeriscaping may be an alternative to various types of traditional gardening.
   YARD: An open, unoccupied space on a lot, other than a court, which is unobstructed from the ground upward by buildings or structures except as otherwise provided in this title.

 
   YARD, FRONT: A yard extending across the full width of the lot, the depth of which is that minimum horizontal distance between the front lot line and a line parallel thereto.

 
   YARD, REAR: A yard extending across the full width of the lot, the depth of which is the minimum horizontal distance between the rear lot line or mean high tide water line and a line parallel thereto.

 
   YARD, REAR LINE OF REQUIRED FRONT YARD: A line parallel to the front lot line and at a distance therefrom equal to the depth of the required front yard, extending across the full width of the lot.

 
   YARD, SIDE: A yard extending from the rear of the required front yard to the front of the required rear yard, the depth of which is the minimum horizontal distance between the side lot line and a line parallel thereto.
(Ord. 1212, 11-16-1993; amd. Ord. 1245, 2-6-1996; Ord. 1250, 4-2-1996; Ord. 1257, 6-18-1996; Ord. 1260, 9-17-1996; Ord. 1272, 6-17-1997; Ord. 1276, 8-19-1997; Ord. 1283, 11-18-1997; Ord. 1286, 3-17-1998; Ord. 1290, 12-15-1998; Ord. 1307, 4-20-1999; Ord. 1315, 1-18-2000; 2000 Code; Ord. 1365, 9-2-2003; Ord. 1381, 2-15-2005; Ord. 1395, 5-16-2006; Ord. 1397, 8-15-2006; Ord. 1401, 10-3-2006; Ord. 1405, 1-22-2007; Ord. 1425, 2-3-2009; Ord. 1444, 8-3-2010; Ord. 1460, 4-19-2011; Ord. 1476, 2-5-2013; Ord. 1483, 11-5-2013; Ord. 1496, 10-14-2014; Ord. 1497, 10-21-2014; Ord. 1514, 12-1-2015; Ord. 1515, 12-15-2015; Ord. 1547, 2-21-2017; Ord. 1550, 7-5-2017; Ord. 1551, 8-15-2017; Ord. 1559, 10-17-2017; Ord. 1571, 9-4-2018; Ord. 1577, 11-20-2018; Ord. 1594, 11-19-2019; Ord. 1613, 2-4-2020; Ord. 1514, 7-21-2020; Ord. 1620, 11-17-2020; Ord. 1626, 6-1-2021; Ord. 1639, 9-20- 2022; Ord. 1646, 3-7-2023; Ord. 1648, 6-21-2023; Ord. 1654, 12-19-2023)
 
Notes
